

Those who had decided to make the switch from Movable Type to WordPress, came in at a time when the software itself was in flux. May 2004 was the month that saw the release of WordPress 1.2, a release that make strides forwards in terms of the software’s flexibility. 

Prior to WordPress 1.2, developers created hacks to extend WordPress, just like they had in b2. A "hack" was some files that came bundled with instructions on where to insert the code into the b2 core files. In b2, administration was carried out in a separate PHP file. The b2 user would open up a text file, `b2menutop.txt`, and add the name of the PHP file that they wished to appear in the menu. When the code ran, the new menu item would appear after the default menu items. To add a hack to the administration screens, the user needed to put the PHP file into the admin directory and add a reference to it in the text file. If the hack output was intended to appear on the website, the user needed to edit b2's `index.php` file to put it in the right place. This meant that when the user updated b2, they would have to save the text file and the index file to ensure that their changes weren't overwritten, and integrate their changes into the new files.

The [plugin system](http://core.trac.wordpress.org/changeset/1008) changed things dramatically. It used hooks to enable developers to extend WordPress without having to mess with core files. Hooks are pieces of code placed throughout the codebase that developers can hook into to run their own code at specific points. There are two types of hooks: filters and actions. Filters were already available in b2 for developers to create hacks which changed content. Actions, which were first added to WordPress 1.2, let developers run code when events, such as posting, were carried out. 

Much of the implementation on the plugin system was done by Ryan Boren. As many of the other original developers’ involvement started to tail off, he was diving straight in to development. Mike Little recalls how he hadn’t noticed Ryan at first, that he’d been active, but quiet in his contributions.  It was the plugin system that made him really take notice: “it shone brighter than most of the other things that people were doing. And that's not to say that people weren't doing good stuff, they were, but that was a step change. The hook system was a step change in WordPress development, and it was probably the first step on quite honestly making it the superior product that it is.”

The system transformed WordPress development for both the software’s developers and the wider community. It meant that the core product didn’t need to include the pet feature of every developer, instead including just what made sense for users. Ryan says that the plugin system enabled the core developers to implement the 80/20 rule: "Is this useful to 80% of our users? If not, try it in a plugin." Unlike hacks, which involved making edits to core files, plugins could be dropped into a directory in a user's WordPress install. Non-technical users were able to extend their blogs without having to mess around with PHP.

The first plugin was the Hello Dolly plugin. The plugin, which is still bundled with WordPress, randomly displays a lyric from the Louis Armstrong song _Hello, Dolly_ in the top right of the admin. It was intended as a guide to making plugins. The second was the [blogtimes plugin](http://wordpress.org/plugins/blogtimes/) which generated a bar graph image showing when posts were created over a certain period of time.


The other major changed ushered in with WordPress 1.2 was that the software was internationalized. From its very beginning, the WordPress community was marked by its international nature. The original developers were from the USA, the United Kingdom, Ireland, and France, and a [forum thread from January 2004 shows how international the growing community was](http://wordpress.org/support/topic/world-domination-?replies=43). Community members came from Hong Kong, Wales, New Zealand, Japan, and Brazil. With people from all over the world using WordPress, platform translations soon followed. The [Japanese WordPress site was set up in December 2003](http://web.archive.org/web/20031205101812/http://wordpress.xwd.jp/), only six months after WordPress launched. As WordPress wasn't yet set up for localization, [Otsukare](http://profiles.wordpress.org/otsukare), a community member from Japan, [created a multilingual fork of WordPress](http://wordpress.org/support/topic/localization-help-needed?replies=102). This was an internationalized version of WordPress that people could use to make their own localizations. It was popular amongst WordPress users from non-English speaking countries who wanted to have WordPress in their own language. Its popularity emphasised the necessity of getting WordPress internationalized. Otsukare’s fork was proving popular and a lack of proper internationalization tools in the core software could have seen many community members use the fork instead. Maintaining two codebases in this way would have been inefficient and prone to bugs. 

The approach adopted was to use [gettext](http://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/). Gettext internationalization is an approach used by lots of FOSS projects - Ryan was already familiar with it from his involvement with GNOME. The method involved marking up the translatable strings with the `gettext()` [function](http://codex.wordpress.org/Translating_WordPress#Localization_Technology) so that a `.pot` file is be created with all of the strings for translation. Translators translate the strings and generate `.po` and `.mo` files for localized versions of WordPress. To internationalize WordPress, someone had to wrap all of the translatable strings with the `gettext()` function and put them in a format that provided a full string to the translator that retained context. This job fell to Ryan. He went through the code, one line at a time, found everything that could be translated, and marked it up. This meant that when WordPress 1.2 was released, it not only contained the plugin API but was fully internationalized.


On May 19th 2004, before WordPress 1.2 had been released, the [first full localisation was in the wild](http://ma.tt/2004/05/wordpress-in-hindi/) -- a localization in Hindi by Pankaj Narula, [panjak](http://wordpress.org/support/profile/pankaj). This was before WordPress 1.2 was even released with the first official `.pot` file (the file that contains a list of all the translatable strings). Following the release of WordPress 1.2, there was an explosion of WordPress translations, for example [French](http://wordpress.org/support/topic/localizing-wordpress-12-i18n-and-l10n/page/3?replies=69%23post-35436) and [Norwegian](http://wordpress.org/support/topic/localizing-wordpress-12-i18n-and-l10n/page/3?replies=69%23post-35436#post-56422).


What WordPress 1.2 did was make WordPress much more accessible and available to a wider group of people. The plugin system turned WordPress from a straightforward blogging tool into a publishing platform that anyone could extend - all you needed was a bit of PHP knowledge. And if you couldn’t write PHP, then it was likely that someone had already created something you could use in the ever-widening commons of plugins, as developers created plugins and distributed their code. With the files internationalized it was now possible for people all over the world to have WordPress in their own language, and a community of translators quickly grew up around the software. Naoko Takano, who has been active in the Japanese community since its inception, recalls that there were other open source projects that didn’t take translations seriously and that WordPress’ internationalization efforts encouraged her to be part of the project.
