
When Mike and Matt decided to fork b2 and create WordPress, they did so with a set of ideals about software and about development. Each of the founders brought their own ideas to the project, others were inherited from b2. It’s no surprise that the developers that founded WordPress had so much in common when it came to their approach. b2 was simple, hackable, usable. It was these aspects of b2 that attracted them to the project. WordPress needed to be simple, hackable, and usable too. These founding philosophies informed much of WordPress’ early development, became a concrete aspect of the project and today still inform decision about software development and community building.

From b2, they inherited a focus on usability. On cafelog.com, Michel kept a development log on which he recorded his thoughts about developing b2. It’s usually a list of things that he’s done that day, but some of the things he mentions provide insight into who he saw as b2’s user base. For example, when he [talks about creating a templating system](http://cafelog.com/?p=30&tb=1), he says that he wants to “make templates customizable by Joe Newbie.” He wanted to create a templating system that any user could customize. A user shouldn’t have to be a CSS genius in order to get their site looking how they wanted it. 

 Another feature of b2 was an install script, written by another contributor, which made it easy for people to install b2. This was in contrast to the most popular blog platform around, Movable Type, which was notoriously difficult to install. A simple install script would make it possible for people without much technical knowledge to install the platform. By the time b2 ceased development, it hadn’t reached the point of a seamless install, but it provided the groundwork for work that Mike and Matt carried out to create an install process that could be done in under five minutes, what came to be known as “the famous 5-minute install.”

So, even before WordPress was WordPress, in its nascent state as b2, there was a focus on making things as easy as possible for all users, and particularly for those who were new to the platform. 

Allied to a this focus on usability, was a commitment to simplicity. Simplicity in software development means keeping focused on providing users with only exactly what they need to get the job done. Software is a tool and, like any tool, the simpler it is the easier it is to use. By keeping things simple, a user can learn how to use the software from the interface itself, with as little external instructions as possible. Good software is self-evident; in order to be self-evident it should be kept simple. This is particularly the case when trying to create a tool that is usable by as many people as possible. 

When Michel started development of b2 he made the decision to focus solely on blogging functionality. He didn’t want to create a CMS, he wanted to create a blogging platform. This meant that all of his early enhancements were centred on simple tools for getting content on the screen. This focus on blogging ensured that, particularly in the early days of development, the platform remained simple.  Early WordPress development, too, was focused on blogging as the developers worked on ways to make blogging simpler for themselves. 

A focus of Matt’s particularly during the early days of WordPress’ development, was on web standards. He was concerned about his website's forward compatibility, for its ability to work in the future across other browsers and devices. A major influence was [Jeffrey Zeldman’s](http://www.digital-web.com/articles/999_of_websites_are_obsolete/) _Forward Compatibility: Designing and Building with Standards_ . Zeldman's book covered how to create standards-compliant websites that would work across browsers and devices. Even prior to forking b2, Matt had converted most of his site to XHTML 1.1. 

Over the early years of WordPress’ development, Matt became more involved with the web standards movement. He often wrote about the [importance of standards compliance](http://ma.tt/2004/03/code-is-food/)(in 2004 he would [become a member](http://ma.tt/2004/05/sting/) of the [web standards project](http://www.webstandards.org)). Mike was also an advocate of web standards, writing enthusiastically about his employer's [first standards-compliant website](http://zed1.com/journalized/archives/2003/11/21/zendor-standards-compliant-website-launched/). 

This meant that many of WordPress' first improvements focused on HTML semantics and web standards. After initializing the repository in CVS (the version control system the project used at that time), and uploading the files, Matt made basic semantic changes to the `index.php` file. He fixed whitespace issues, and converted `<div>` tags into heading tags. Using the correct tags to generate proper headings reinforced the content's semantic meaning on the webpage WordPress generated. Matt also enhanced `index.php`'s default structure, aiming for XHTML strict compliance. 

After WordPress 0.7 launched, Matt outlined his thoughts on the future of WordPress on [WordPress.org](http://WordPress.org). He wrote, (http://web.archive.org/web/20031002112415/http://wordpress.org/about/future/) "one thing that will never change is our commitment to web standards and an unmatched user experience.” 

Simplicity, usability, and web standards - these are principles that guide WordPress development to the present day. Over time and as new people joined the project, new axioms would become a part of the community, augmenting and strengthening these guiding principles. Taken together, these founding philosophies attest to a dedicated user-first focus. Before anything else, the software was developed with the user in mind. This perhaps came about because the software’s developers started out as users themselves. Mike and Matt were users of b2 - they started to blog before they started developing blogging software. They started developing blogging software only because they were interested in making improvements to their own blogs. And as they made these improvements they got more drawn in to the development community. But they remained, particularly in the beginning, software users, which meant that while they were developing software they retained an empathy for others. This was also the case for other developers who became involved with the project. Developers didn’t get involved with the project just because they felt like working on blogging software. They got involved with the project because they used blogging software. They had installed the software for their own blog, found that they wanted to change or improve something, and contributed those changes back. 

What ensures the continuation of this user-first approach is a decision that was made prior to even the fork of WordPress, a legacy that the community is either sustain by or stuck with, depending on your perspective. That legacy is the GPL, the software license that Michel decided to distribute b2 with, and that remains WordPress’ license to this day.