In the very early days of the project new developers to the project were often given direct commit access to the code repository. This meant a developer could work on code and add it directly to the core product. It didn’t need to be reviewed by another person (though sometimes code would be sent around amongst developers before committed). Many of the early commits are from names largely absent from the commit logs today - mikelittle, alex_t_king, emc3 (dougal), and even michelvaldrighi, who came back and contributed to the WordPress project. 

During the initial development period, Matt and Mike had commit access to the repository; both could make changes to WordPress whenever they felt like it. 

There was no real process in those days. It was the extreme of what Eric Raymond talks about his work _[The Cathedral and the Bazaar](http://www.catb.org/esr/writings/cathedral-bazaar/cathedral-bazaar/)_. Raymond contrasts the open source bazaar-style development model with the “cathedral building” of traditional software development. The metaphor of the bazaar is apt, with its noise and bustle; people talking on top of each other, different players with their own aims and agenda, an occasional voice shouts louder than the rest, rising above the clamor to be heard. An open source project operates in this jumble. Common sense tells you it’s all wrong but, just like the bazaar, this frenetic multiplicity somehow works. 

The first two years of WordPress’s development were marked by this laissez-faire approach to development. A developer would see a problem and fix it. If a developer was interested in a feature they would write that. They used their own experience as bloggers, as well as their b2 forum activity, to guide them. "As bloggers, we had similar desires to those other people had," says Mike. "I seem to remember still sticking around the b2 forums and looking at what people were asking about and what people wanted while it was still in b2 and getting inspiration and ideas from that."

 It wasn’t until later that more hierarchy was introduced into the project. In those first few years, however, it can hardly of mattered. So few people were actually using the software. Many of the developers felt that they were working on blogging software for themselves and if other people wanted to use it then great. The project wasn’t yet weighed down with the burden that comes from supporting millions of users and years of legacy code. 


One of the questions that was frequently asked, particularly around the time that b2 was forked, was whether the new WordPress developers planned to do a rewrite of the code base. b2’s emphasis on getting easy-to-use features on the screen as quickly as possible had often come at the expense of good coding practices. Michel [was learning about PHP](http://wordpress.tv/2012/02/27/les-origines-de-wordpress-la-naissance-de-b2cafelog/) when he wrote b2, and he would dream up ideas for features and get them on the screen as quickly as possible. This led to inefficient code and techniques counter-intuitive to an experienced coder. Rather than taking a modular approach to solve a logic problem, Michel’s stream-of-consciousness code grew organically. This created multiple code interdependencies which could cause problems for developers new to the project. A line of code would change, and break something that appeared unrelated. 

There were, however, some advantages to such rudimentary code. Michel's inexperience meant that the code had a level of simplicity that made it easy for other developers to understand. Whereas a more experienced developer might write complex code, Michel often took the simplest route to solve a problem. "In a way it was beautiful because it was so simple," says developer Alex King, [alexkingorg](http://profiles.wordpress.org/alexkingorg/), "It wasn't elegant but it was very straightforward and very accessible. For someone who didn't have a lot of development experience coming in --- like me --- it was very comfortable understanding what was going on."

This simplistic, often chaotic, codebase, put some developers off. Prior to joining the project, Dougal asked whether b2 should be rewritten, or whether the code base should simply be built upon. On the support forum, he asked [how far the developers intended to go with the rewrite](http://wordpress.org/support/topic/how-much-will-you-rewrite#post-16): were they planning to rewrite the whole codebase from scratch, or would something recognizably b2 still remain? [The response was that](http://wordpress.org/support/topic/how-much-will-you-rewrite#post-33) they planned to structure the code more logically as they went along, with object oriented code a long-term goal. 

There wouldn’t be a total rewrite of WordPress. The WordPress project was launched in the wake of the launch of Mozilla’s browser, which was the result of a three and a half year rewrite of Netscape. Taking Mozilla as a negative influence, many developers in the FOSS community felt that [rewriting software was a big mistake](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/fog0000000069.html). While rewriting might produce an all new codebase, it lacked the years of testing and bug fixes that came from using a mature code base. It also meant left space for competitors to emerge while developers were focusing inwards on rewriting.

Instead of a wholesale rewrite, WordPress’ developers worked on iteratively improving and refactoring code. For example, in late 2003, major changes to the file structure of WordPress involved replacing "b2" files with "wp-“, dubbed [The Great Renaming](http://wordpress.org/news/2003/12/the-great-renaming/). Tidying up b2's files had been on Michel's agenda in 2001 and had made some improvements already, but they lacked consistency. Now the WordPress project had decided to tackle the problem. However, when the files were renamed with the new wp- prefix, instead of the old be one, hack writers would find that their hacks would no longer work, but it was felt that the upheaval was necessary to organize the file structure for long-term stability. WordPress' file structure morphed from b2 to the familiar WordPress file structure used today, with many files consolidated into the `wp-includes` and `wp-admin` folders.

These sort of iterative steps have been more of a feature of WordPress’ development than any major restructuring or rearchitecting. And, over time, such changes have become harder to do as the number of people using the software means that many more sites are likely to break.

—


Almost straight away, the developers had basic ways to communicate with one another. The hackers mailing list wasn’t set up for 17 months after the project launch. The project’s main developers communicated on a private mailing list. One of the first ways that the developers and other community members communicated was using an IRC chat room. b2/Cafelog had a channel hosted on the freenode network so it made sense for WordPress to have one too. The first of these was #wordpress. 

An IRC channel provides a place where people can instantaneously communicate with one another. It’s also possible to log an IRC channel so that a record of what happened can be posted online. In the early days of WordPress, many community members spent all day hanging out in the IRC chat room. For some, it was the tone of the IRC chat room that got them more actively involved in the WordPress community. Owen Winkler ([ringmaster](http://profiles.wordpress.org/ringmaster)) recalls:

> I had stumbled on IRC channels for other programs before, and you know, you ask a question and no one answers or they make fun of you. WordPress was never like that. When I started out, if you came to the channel and you asked a question, people answered the question. After you learned a bit, if you stuck around, you would answer the questions too.	
It was this camaraderie that caused people to stick around. Many of them were learning to write code, making software for the first time, and they were doing it together. Over time, WordPress has spawned more IRC chat rooms. The #wordpress IRC chat room is used more as a tool for user support, though there is a small community of regulars that frequent it. The #wordpress-dev channel is the place where WordPress development takes place, including weekly meetings and development chats. There are also individual chat rooms for the teams that work on different areas of the project.	


The other communication tool that the project had right from the beginning, was on WordPress.org - the forums. WordPress.org was launched in April 2003, and was the home to the development blog, some schematic documentation, and support forums. The [original WordPress homepage](http://web.archive.org/web/20030618021947/http://wordpress.org/) told the world that "WordPress is a semantic personal publishing platform with a focus on aesthetics, web standards, and usability." The site gave the WordPress community a presence and the forums provided a home.

Originally they ran on miniBB, a simple, fast piece of forum software but as the number of people on the support forums grew, the software was unable to handle the increased load. In 2004, while stuck in San Francisco over Christmas, Matt took what he’d learned from WordPress and applied it to forum software, writing bbPress. Now, bbPress is a plugin, but when it was originally coded it was a standalone piece of software with its own templating system. [Matt wrote in the launch post](http://ma.tt/2004/12/bbpress/) that it was intended to “bring some weblog and WordPress sensibilities to forum software.”
				
Today, the WordPress forums are mostly used for providing support to users and developers, but back when they were first set up they were the primary mode through which the community communicated. The [first post on the forums](https://wordpress.org/support/topic/beta-test?replies=12) appeared before WordPress was even released, with a request to beta test the software. The word had got out that there was a fork of b2 and people were eager to use it. Those involved in the thread were the first to sign up for the forums, involved with the project at its very inception.

The support forums were used to talk about everything related to WordPress: [the WordPress.org website](http://wordpress.org/support/topic/wordpressorg-feedback?replies=19), [bug reports](http://wordpress.org/support/topic/textile-breaks-when-editing-posts?replies=3), [troubleshooting](http://wordpress.org/support/topic/weird-message?replies=3), [request for design feedback](http://wordpress.org/support/topic/critisism-of-my-new-design?replies=4). It was also a place for people to [post their hacks](http://wordpress.org/support/topic/wiki-links-hack?replies=4) and later their plugins. 	
Developers communicated on these open channels but anyone was able to join in. It didn’t take long for people who weren’t developers to be attracted to the project. These were sometimes people who were using WordPress but who didn’t have the technical skills or confidence to actively contribute to the code. Others were more interested in the supporting roles that are essential to a successful project - writing documentation, for example, or providing support. Many of these people would go on to have just as big an impact on the project as any of the developers.