
Just as many of the WordPress developers had started out in open source by answering questions in the support forums, new WordPress users got involved, answering forum questions. A common path to getting involved in the community was that someone would install the platform, encounter a problem, and go to the forum to ask a question. They’d stick around, surfing the forums or hanging out in a chat room. And then someone would ask a question that they knew the answer to and that was it, they were hooked. Mark Riley ([Podz](http://profiles.wordpress.org/podz)) was one of the first moderators on the WordPress.org forums. “You’re a hero to somebody every day, aren’t you?” he says now. “There’s nothing like somebody saying thank you. Yaay, you fixed it! It works! You’re thinking cool. I’ll remember that. That was cool. I like doing this.”

A community of non-developers grew in parallel to the development community, allowing developers to spend more time writing code. People tried WordPress, liked it, and wanted to get involved. Craig Hartel, [nuclearmoose](http://profiles.wordpress.org/nuclearmoose/), was one early community member who signed up at [WordPress.org](http://WordPress.org) in November 2003. He was interested in blogging and had a little bit of programming experience. "I didn't have any specific skills," he says "but there was no better way than jumping right in. I decided I was going to find some way to get involved." He got to know people by asking questions and letting people know that he was interested in helping. Craig hung out on the IRC channel until he "realized that getting involved was a matter of just doing something."

The project's user-centric nature meant there was work for people from a variety of backgrounds: anyone could answer support forum questions, or get involved with IRC discussions. Some of these community members found that while developers weren’t always clear in their answers to non-technical users of the platform, they were able to do the job of translating developer-speak into user speak. Often these community members would act as advocates for users, with Podz particularly doing so, later becoming a go-between for the support forums and the wp-hackers mailing lists. As the developers of the software become more absorbed in developing the software and started using it less, this sort of user advocacy would be increasingly important 

Not long after WordPress was launched, blogs starting cropping up dedicated to to the platform. The first of these was WeblogToolsCollection (WLTC), a blog initially launched by Mark Ghosh to cover every type of weblog tool. It was the first of a long string of WordPress community blogs, followed closely by Carthik Sharma’s [Wordlog](http://wordlog.com) and Lorelle van Fossen’s [Lorelle on WordPress](http://lorelle.wordpress.com). 	
These blogs provided a place outside of the official channels for people to congregate. They were platforms on which enthusiasts could write about the growing platform, providing information, tutorials, and commentary. Some focused on tutorials, sharing guides on how to do things with WordPress, others created lists of plugins and themes that would draw large amounts of traffic. Mark Riley’s tamba2 blog, for example, was home to a number of popular tutorials, and Lorelle van Fossen ported many of her tutorials over to WordPress’ official documentation.  The authors soon discovered that there were lots of people who were interested in what they were saying. “I suddenly got all of this attention for not knowing a lot and not really doing a lot," says Mark, "and that really pleased me." The appreciation he got from the WordPress community for running WLTC spurred him to help out more with the forums, write his own plugins, and get more involved. Posts on WLTC about platforms like Movable Type quickly tailed off and almost all of the posts are on WordPress, or on migrating from other platforms to WordPress.

At its peak, WLTC received 12,000 to 15,000 unique hits per day but Mark was never fully able to capitalize on the traffic. Running a niche community blog takes a lot of work and doesn't result in a huge monetary payoff. "Most of the people who came to WLTC wanted news about plugins, or they wanted to know how to do X, Y, or Z. They were trying to find this information and the quality of audience was kind of low." People who visited WLTC were looking for ways to fix their blog or website, learn tricks, or find out about the latest free themes and plugins. They weren't necessarily the types of people that advertisers would value. However, WLTC would have a major role to play in the development of the WordPress community, providing a home for discussion and debate away from WordPress.org. 	

All of these new community members didn’t want to just produce content about WordPress on their own blogs. The platform needed documentation and there were people who wanted to write it. The people who were answering questions on the forums saw this need - people were asking the same questions over and over again; documentation would make it possible for them to help themselves. In November 2003, WordPress’ first mailing list was set up - for discussion of WordPress’ documentation.  The first docs were on the WordPress.org website. These were largely schematic, without a lot of content. By and large they were holding pages for content that was promised in the future:

Image: 2003_10_docs

 In [December 2003 the WordPress wiki was launched](http://wordpress.org/news/2003/12/wordpress-wiki/). FOSS projects often use wikis for their documentation. The advantage to a wiki is that anyone can easily edit the content. Some wikis require a login, others can be edited by anyone. The downside to using a wiki, particularly when building a content management system, is that contributors have to learn a new tool for creating content. Another problem with a wiki is that, without careful curation, it can become messy, out-of-date, and difficult to navigate. 

Originally, the wiki was designed to complement the [official documentation](http://web.archive.org/web/20030811221523/http://wordpress.org/docs/). The [landing page told visitors](http://web.archive.org/web/20031224140754/http://wiki.wordpress.org/) that it was "designed for us to be able to work together on projects." While developers were working on getting WordPress 1.0 shipping in January 2004, other community members were working furiously on the wiki. 

This was in contrast to the little work that was being done on the official documentation. An [FAQ had been created](https://web.archive.org/web/20040402000122/http://wordpress.org/docs/faq/), as had some [template documentation](https://web.archive.org/web/20040411104706/http://wordpress.org/docs/template/). But the [majority of documentation was being written on the wiki](https://web.archive.org/web/20040323105321/http://wiki.wordpress.org/).
 
Perhaps the wiki felt like a much more informal, freeform way to create documents. The official support documents, such as a guide to template tags, hacking, and using WordPress, were much more formal. By July 2004, it was the main documentation for WordPress, and it needed a name. In WordPress' IRC chat room, [monkinetic](http://wordpress.org/support/profile/monkinetic) suggested "Codex”. The community loved the name, with Matt saying saying it was "short, sweet, and we can totally own that word on Google."

Writing documentation for WordPress wasn’t always easy, particularly in those first few years. In a post on WordPress.org, Cena Mayo, [cena](http://profiles.wordpress.org/cena/), who had taken on the [role of reporting on the WordPress.org blog](http://wordpress.org/news/2004/03/a-brief-introduction/), outlined [some of the issues](http://wordpress.org/news/2004/04/state-of-the-docs-address/):

> "Part of the problem is the rapidly changing face of WordPress itself. The CVS is currently at version 1.2-alpha, with almost daily updates. 1.2, which will be the next official release, is much different from the widely used 1.0.1/1.02 series, and even more different from the still-used .72."

With file structures changing, new functionality appearing, new template tags, and new database tables, writing formal documentation must have seemed like a pointless task when the writer knew that things would change quickly. By April 2004 things were changing so fast that much of the documentation that was written about hacks (the normal way of extending WordPress) was out of date. The next version of WordPress was bringing in huge changes, and things were changing so fast that it was possible that within a few versions that WordPress would be indistinguishable from the 1.0 version. With WordPress 1.2 coming out in May there was a huge amount of documentation that needed to be written to support the new functionality, and, just before release, something happened that brought together everyone in the community.[ need to rewrite this chapter ending to segue better with next chapter]

	