## 27. Update notifications

In July 2007, Peter Westwood was added as a core committer, which brought the number of people who could commit code to the repository to four. Westi became involved in the project in 2004, when, while working as a software engineer, he had written a script that downloaded WordPress and installed it on a server. He went on to help out with the Codex then moved on to finding and fixing bugs. Like many of the other developers, he had little experience of PHP when he came to the project.

The wp-hackers mailing list was in to its third year. Over time the amount of productive discussion on the mailing list diminished. More of the decision making happened elsewhere. For example, in February 2007 [Ryan integrated phpmailer with WordPress](https://core.trac.wordpress.org/ticket/3862). A short discussion happened on WordPress Trac (WordPress’ bug tracking software) and the code was committed. It wasn’t until September that a [discussion about PHPMailer happened on wp-hackers](http://lists.automattic.com/pipermail/wp-hackers/2007-September/014497.html), a discussion that few of the committers participated in.

Less development happened on the mailing list. It inclined towards [meta-discussion about the mailing list](http://lists.automattic.com/pipermail/wp-hackers/2007-September/015058.html), about the [high signal to noise ratio](http://lists.automattic.com/pipermail/wp-hackers/2007-September/015173.html), and about how to [improve mailing list etiquette](http://lists.automattic.com/pipermail/wp-hackers/2007-October/015489.html). 	

[Andy Skelton wrote on his own blog about the problem with wp-hackers](http://andy.wordpress.com/2007/10/03/wp-hackers/):

> There is just one thing I want to make clear about wp-hackers: a hacker is not someone who discusses or pays lip service or dissents or casts a vote or says what can or should be done. Hackers aren’t committee members. Hackers are more interested in proving what can be done than arguing about it.	

On wp-hackers there was too much talking, not enough hacking, too much opinion, and not enough fact. During its life span, a mailing list can become dominated by people who have time to comment, rather than those doing the work. Those doing the work have the most valuable feedback but they’re often too busy to keep up with a high-traffic mailing list. Mailing lists can be a time-suck, with a tendency to descend into long arguments driven by people with the time to contribute to such arguments, dragging those who don’t have time into flame wars.	

WordPress isn’t alone in this phenomena. A [2013 study of the Apache Lucene mailing list](http://sback.it/publications/msr2013.pdf) found that “although the declared intent of development mailing list communication is to discuss project internals and code changes/additions, only 35% of the email threads regard the implementation of code artefacts.” As well as discussing development, participating in the mailing list often discussed social norms and behavior. The study also found that project developers participate in less than 75% and start only half of the discussions, and that developers prefer to communicate on the issue tracking software, a finding resonant with WordPress, when developers switched from the mailing list to WordPress trac. 	

Mailing lists often have a tendency towards bike shed discussions. [^fn-1] The idea of bike shed painting is derived from [Parkinson’s Law of triviality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parkinson%27s_law_of_triviality):	

> Parkinson shows how you can go in to the board of directors and get approval for building a multi-million or even billion dollar atomic power plant, but if you want to build a bike shed you will be tangled up in endless discussions.	

An atomic plant is so vast that only very few people can grasp it. The board of directors assume that somebody has the knowledge and has done the groundwork. In contrast, everyone can build a bike shed, so everyone has an opinion on how it should be built, and, more specifically, what color it should be.

In his book, _Producing Open Source Software_, Karl Fogel notes that as the technical difficulty of an issues goes down, the “[probability of meandering goes up](http://producingoss.com/en/producingoss.html#bikeshed).” If a discussion is highly technical it can be difficult for everyone to follow, but there are other discussions which everyone can follow and engage with. 	
[From _Producing Open Source Software_](http://producingoss.com/en/producingoss.html#bikeshed)	

> consensus is hardest to achieve in technical questions that are simple to understand and easy to have an opinion about, and in "soft" topics such as organization, publicity, funding, etc. People can participate in those arguments forever, because there are no qualifications necessary for doing so, no clear ways to decide (even afterward) if a decision was right or wrong, and because simply outwaiting other discussants is sometimes a successful tactic.	

With the fast rate of growth of its community and its low barrier to entry, the WordPress project has been as susceptible to bike shed discussions as any other free software project. A [Google search for “bike shed” on the wp-hackers mailing list](https://www.google.com/search?q=site%3Ahttp%3A%2F%2Flists.automattic.com%2Fpipermail%2Fwp-hackers%2F+bikeshed&oq=site%3A&aqs=chrome.2.69i57j69i58j69i59j69i65l3.2535j0j4&sourceid=chrome&es_sm=91&ie=UTF-8#q=site:http:%2F%2Flists.automattic.com%2Fpipermail%2Fwp-hackers%2F+bikeshed&safe=off) displays the discussions in which someone has cried “bike shed”, as does a [similar search on trac](https://core.trac.wordpress.org/search?q=bikeshed&noquickjump=1&changeset=on&ticket=on).	

In 2007, for example, discussion about what to call Links got heated. A [member of wp-hackers asked](http://lists.automattic.com/pipermail/wp-hackers/2007-June/013299.html) “Anyone know why it's still called Blogroll in admin, when it's called Bookmarks in functions (wp_list_bookmarks) and yet displays by default as a list of "Links" in the sidebar?” The original post, _Blogroll, Bookmarks, Links_, generated a total of 79 emails on the mailing list alone, and discussion spilled [on to a trac ticket](https://core.trac.wordpress.org/ticket/3695).	

Of course, one person’s bike shed is another person’s bête noire, and there were times that wp-hackers was alight with issues that the community felt ought to be taken seriously. One such instance was in early September 2007, prior to the release of WordPress 2.3, which contained the update notification system. This notifies users when a new version of WordPress or of a plugin is available for install. [The system](https://core.trac.wordpress.org/ticket/1476) collects data from a user’s site and sends it back to http://api.wordpress.org. The data collected is the WordPress version, PHP version, locale setting, and the website’s URL. A [further piece of code](https://core.trac.wordpress.org/changeset/5913) carries a [plugin update check](https://core.trac.wordpress.org/ticket/4795), which sends the website’s URL, WordPress version, and plugin info (including inactive plugins) to api.wordpress.org.

For some, that this type of data collection is contrary to the ethos of a free software project. They thought that [collecting the blog URL was unnecessary](http://lists.automattic.com/pipermail/wp-hackers/2007-September/014860.html). A ticket on WordPress trac [requested that update checking be anonymized](https://core.trac.wordpress.org/ticket/5066). Others had no problem with WordPress collecting the data, but were [unhappy that WordPress did not disclose it](http://lists.automattic.com/pipermail/wp-hackers/2007-September/014919.html). A number of people who didn’t oppose the changes still felt that there should be an opt-out option so that users who required complete privacy would be able to turn off data collection.

This debate goes to the heart of one of the design philosophies in WordPress: “decisions, not options”. This idea is heavily influenced by a [2002 article written by GNOME contributor Havoc Pennington](http://ometer.com/free-software-ui.html). Many free software user interfaces cram in a huge number of options so that they can be configured in multiple ways. If there is an argument in a software project about whether something should or shouldn’t be added, a superficial solution is to add an option. The more options one adds, the more unwieldy a user interface becomes. In his article, Pennington writes” preferences have a cost [..], each one has a price and you have to consider its value.” He outlines the problem with too many options:

- When there are too many preferences it’s difficult for a user to find them
- They can damage QA and testing. Some bugs only happen when a certain configuration of options are selected
- They make creating a good UI difficult
- They keep people from fixing real bugs - some software projects add options that are just there to fix bugs
- They can confuse users
- The space that you have for preferences is finite so fill it wisely

WordPress developers carefully consider introducing a new option. Over time they have become better about making decisions about options. By the time the question arose about data collection, they were extremely reluctant to introduce new options. [Westi posted to the wp-hackers thread](http://lists.automattic.com/pipermail/wp-hackers/2007-September/015119.html):	

> One of the core design ideas for WordPress is that we don't introduce options lightly. The moment you think of making a feature optional you challenge the argument for introducing the feature in the beginning.

What benefit would an opt-out button for update notifications provide to users? The purpose of the notifications is to inform a user that a new version of WordPress, or a plugin, is available for them into install. This helps users’ to stay up-to-date and secure. Adding an option to opt-out of update notifications would only reduce the number of people updating their sites, and increase the number of insecure instances of WordPress. The benefit to adding the option doesn’t outweigh the cost. 

Therefore, despite the extensive discussion on wp-hackers, [WordPress 2.3 was launched as planned](http://wordpress.org/news/2007/09/wordpress-23/), with the following note in the announcement post:	

> Our new update notification lets you know when there is a new release of WordPress or when any of the plugins you use has an update available. It works by sending your blog URL, plugins, and version information to our new api.wordpress.org service which then compares it to the plugin database and tells you whats the latest and greatest you can use.

They also published the [first version of a privacy policy on WordPress.org](http://lists.automattic.com/pipermail/wp-hackers/2007-September/015014.html).	

Amidst these discussions, there were some changes to the project structure, when both [Peter Westwood and Mark Jaquith were made lead developers](https://wordpress.org/news/2007/09/new-faces/). The announcement post describes them as “a few old faces who are taking on bigger roles in the community.” Both were active committers who had taken on more and more of a leadership role. Both had participated in many of the more challenging discussions in the community, and they weren’t always in agreement with the current project leadership. They both, for example, opposed Matt’s proposal for the taxonomy structure, and Mark was one of the people to voice concerns over data collection in WordPress 2.3. This broadening of the funnel brought new perspectives to the project leadership. For the first time since they early days of the project, there were people other than Matt and Ryan to help guide and shape development of both the software and the project.

[^Fn-1] The notion of a bikeshed was popularized in FOSS projects by Karl Fogel. In his book, [Producing Open Source Software](http://producingoss.com/), he reprints [an email from Poul-Henning Kamp](http://bikeshed.com/) to the FreeBSD mailing list with the title “A bike shed (any color will do) on greener grass…”, in which Kamp uses the “painting the bikeshed” analogy to describe discussions on the mailing list.
