
## 13

Following the release of WordPress 1.5, there were some shifts in the way that the software was developed. This was precipitated by a shift in the version control system [from CVS to a more modern version control system, SVN](http://lists.wordpress.org/pipermail/hackers/2005-February/004078.html)[^fn-1]. At that time, the most active contributors were Ryan and Matt, so when the move was made none of the other original developers had their commit access renewed.

This started a long period in which WordPress development operated through a funnel. Contributors would create a patch, upload it to mosquito (and later trac), it would be reviewed by one of the committers who would then commit the code to the main repository. Over time, the funnel became smaller as Matt’s focus was elsewhere and most of the development was being driven by Ryan. This style of development has its advantages and disadvantages, and it was often the subject of discussion amongst the community, particularly on wp-hackers. The advantage of having a funnelling process is that disagreements about code happen before a change lands in the repository. This is one of the purposes of having a mailing list where people can send around patches. The disadvantage is that one person has to review every patch, which frustrates developers who are waiting for their patches to be committed. 

This approach to development was heavily influenced by the Linux project, which Ryan had some involvement with in the past. As the project began to really take shape as recognizable FOSS project, with a defined development process and proper developer infrastructure, much of these changes were guided by Ryan’s previous experience. WordPress did differ in the fact that [Linux has only one committer](http://www.linuxfoundation.org/content/23-how-patches-get-kernel) - the project founder Linus Torvalds - whereas WordPress had two, and this progressively opened up to more and more committers. The other difference is that Linux has a number of maintainers who maintain different subsystems before pushing patches upstream. This means that Torvalds doesn’t review all of the thousands of patches that go into the kernel. He just reviews a fraction of them and review is delegated to trusted subsystem maintainers. Although WordPress in the future would move towards component maintainers, it never followed Linux in this manner.


 A committer is someone who can use the commit command to make changes to the group’s central repository. This number of people who can do this on a project tends to vary, with projects deciding on the number of committers depending on their own structure and philosophies. The question of who should have commit access to the WordPress repository comes up again and again. There are regular threads requesting that more people be given commit. There are a number of reasons that people request commit access: to speed up the development process, to prevent situations in which patches wait months for a review, to acknowledge the contributions of project regulars, to create a more egalitarian project structure. Adding a new committer to a project is a major decision and the project’s approach changed from the wild west days of coding from WordPress 0.7 to 1.5. As the project was getting on its feet, anyone who demonstrated some technical expertise and a small amount of dedication was given commit access. All of those developers could apply code to the repository whenever they wanted. But as the project grew, and the number of users grew, it became more important to have some sort of filtering mechanism for all of that code. A committer is the filter through which the code is passed. When someone is given commit access to the repository it demonstrates a level of trust. 

[Karl Fogel describes committers as](http://producingoss.com/en/producingoss.html#committers) “the only formally distinct class of people found in all open source projects.”  “Committers are an unavoidable concession to discrimination in a system which is otherwise as non-discriminatory as possible,” he writes. As much as one tries to maintain that commit is a functional role, commit access is a symbol of trust, both in terms of coding skills and in terms of a belief and adherence to the project’s core beliefs and ethos. It creates a power dynamic between those that have commit access and those that don’t.

The role of a committer is to provide quality control. They make sure that the code that goes into the repository is of a high enough quality. In order to decide who to give commit access to, a project maintainer has to first find people who not only write good code but who are good at reviewing other people’s code. This means being good at recognising places in which code can be improved and being constructive when providing feedback. But there are other, social skills that go along with being a committer. For one, the person also needs to demonstrate an adherence to a project’s ideals. In the case of WordPress, this meant being fully committed to the user-first approach that has always been adopted by the project, often at the expense of developer freedoms and experience. Another skill they need to have is to be able to “[play well in the sandbox](http://producingoss.com/en/committers.html#choosing-committers)”. Someone could write flawless code, but if they are unable to work with other people they aren’t going to make a wonderful committers. It’s important to make good choices about who is given commit access because once it has been given to someone it is difficult to take it away.

In an attempt to avoid an “us and them” mentality in which committers have a higher status than everyone else, the WordPress project had only two committers. This meant that everyone was subject to the same review process and the same rules. By opening it up to more people, they could create a feeling of dissatisfaction amongst those who didn’t get commit access. But by not opening it up at all, there was a sense of frustration amongst developers who felt that they could never progress within the current structures of the project. The other disadvantage to having so few committers is that the project was growing, as was the number of patches that were coming in. There wasn’t time to review all of the patches and many of them were languishing on trac. 

This has been a perennial tug of war between those who contribute to the project and those who maintain it, and even amongst the project leaders themselves. Who gets commit access? How long for? What sort of status is attached to commit? Should only lead developers be committers? What is a lead developer anyway? Over the coming years these questions would be played out at various stages of the project’s development. 



[^fn-1] A version control system is a tool for managing the changes to a piece of software, document, or other collection of information. Each change is identified by a number and the name of the person who has made the change. They are often accompanied by comments about what that change is. A version control system allows a project to keep track of changes and also to revert changes as necessary.