## 16. WordPress.com

While things fizzled out with WordPress Incorporated, Donncha was working on building WordPress.com. Matt, who was employed at CNET, had pitched the idea of a blogging network based on WordPress to his employers. Many of the major internet companies at the time had a blogging network - Google’s Blogger, Yahoo 360, and Microsoft Spaces, for example. Also, CNET owned a lot of domains that would be perfect for a blogging network, like online.com. CNET decided against the idea but the idea itself didn’t disappear. Matt decided that even without doing it under the rubric of CNET, he would go ahead and do it himself [^fn-1]. 

One of the first things that needed to be done was acquire the WordPress.com domain name. At the time it was in the hands an organization called [Open Domain](http://www.opendomain.org/). Open domain registered the domains of free software projects and gave the projects permission to use the domain in return for a link on the website or some other form of acknowledgement. It was unclear to both the WordPress community and the wider free software community whether open domain was a [straightforward domain squatter or someone who genuinely wanted to help free software communities](http://archive09.linux.com/feature/140576). During the period in which the organization owned WordPress.com, they also registered Drupal.com, though this was [donated to Drupal without major incident](http://buytaert.net/drupal-com). The WordPress community was perturbed that someone was squatting on the WordPress.com, even if there were good intentions. It was important that the domain be acquired, rather than just left in the hand of Open Domain with the DNS pointed at it. There was little security in a blogging network in which the domain name was held by a third-party. How could anyone be certain that the third party take the site down? After months of wrangling between the project and the owner of Open Domain, Matt acquired the WordPress.com domain name.


Once the name was secured, work could start properly on building the network. As the developer of WPMU, Donncha was the perfect choice to get it up and running. He was bored by his job at the time and was looking for something more interesting. When Matt emailed the WordPress security mailing list to see if anyone was interested, Donncha got in touch. 

When it was first set up, WordPress.com was just running WPMU trunk. When changes were made to WordPress.com, Donncha pushed them upstream to the core software. Development was fast, with Donncha working on two servers and live editing code. Without any users to worry about, he could move quickly. He worked on improving the user-focused functionality working and built a network administration screen so that the network could be properly managed. The process was helped along by patches that came in from the WPMU community to clean up the admin screens. Features developed for WordPress.com but which didn’t necessarily sit well in the WPMU core software were put into plugins like Domain Mapping and Global Tags. 

The next person to be brought in to work on WordPress.com was Andy Skelton([skeltoac](https://profiles.wordpress.org/skeltoac)). Andy had developed a service and plugin called Blogs of the Day. This was a self-hosted stats plugin produced a list of the most popular blogs that day. As well as providing a user with stats for their own website it had a centralized server that recorded data. This produced the most popular blogs list. Andy set up a server and put a script on it that loaded the PHP and ran every time there was a hit on someone’s blog. After meeting Matt in Seattle, Andy was brought on board to help with creating a stats plugin for WordPress.com. He did this using the knowledge he had built up over Blogs of the Day which, for a number of years, was featured on the front page of WordPress.com. This made Blogs of the Day Automattic’s first acquisition. 

WordPress.com was open to signups in August 2005. The WordPress.com developers were concerned about scalability, so to control the growth of users on the untested servers, signups were [based on invites only](http://matt.wordpress.com/2005/08/15/invites/).  Many people who were involved with the WordPress project had their own WordPress.com blogs, lorelle,wordpress.com, for example, and mark.wordpress.com. Every person who signed up got one invite to pass along. Supply of invites quickly outstripped demand, with one invite even finding its way on to ebay. 

The other way that a person could sign up for WordPress.com was to download the Flock browser. Flock was a social-media focused browser that had social networking built in to its interface. “I thought Flock was the future,” says Matt now. “First we did the invites, and then we thought well, we’ll allow you to bypass an invite if you’re using Flock because then we’ll know that you’re kind of a social in the know cool person.” Flock was integrated with WordPress.com so users could use it to post to their WordPress.com blog. Both of these measures - invites and Flock - allowed WordPress.com to grow in a slow and sustainable way. Putting a barrier in the way of new sign-ups controlled the flow of people and helped with scalability. 		

It wasn’t just WordPress.com’s servers that had to scale. A new influx of users meant a new influx of people who needed support. This, first of all, had an impact on the WordPress.org forums users found their way there looking for help. There wasn’t a clear distinction between WordPress.com and WordPress.org and many people who needed support for WordPress.com went to the WordPress.org forums. This caused some discontent amongst the WordPress.org support forum volunteers, who felt that they were providing free work for a service which would eventually become commercial. 

To solve this problem, a support email address was set up for WordPress.com users. Support was originally done by WordPress.com’s developers, diverting their attention from writing code to helping out users. “I found that I would spend half my day replying to users,” recalls Donncha, “and then being completely wrecked in that your mind is completely taken off programming new features, or improving things, fixing bugs, just because this whole thing is so tiring.” After the mailing list, a community support forum was set up, and eventually a ticketing system. 

 Mark Riley, Podz, who was active on the WordPress.org support forums, was hired to do all of the support for WordPress.com. For a long time he was solely responsible for support at WordPress.com. The next person hired for support was in 2008. In that time 49,486 support tickets were closed. Nowadays, WordPress.com users have a community on their own forums and a huge team of "Happiness Engineers" provides support across Automattic, but even today, it's not unusual for one of them to land on the WordPress.org forums looking for help.


Creating a user-focused blogging platform like WordPress.com made sense in the context of the WordPress project. WordPress has always been committed to users. It has always had laypeople at its heart, people who don't necessarily know the mechanics of how a server works but who want a website. WordPress.com was built for people who just want to fill out a form and have a blog, but still have the power of WordPress. This means that WordPress.com is a balancing act. There are always be people who want it simpler, with less functionality, and there are always be people who want it more like the WordPress software, with plugins. To prevent people running code on their website, WordPress.com does not allow uses to install plugins. Instead, WordPress.com provides a middle ground for people who don’t want to set up a WordPress website but who wanted to be able to blog.

However, a hosted service like WordPress.com needs a have a business behind it to pay for server costs, run the software, provide support, and build new features. The free software project, with its haphazard donations and income from hosting companies, couldn't maintain a such a network on a wide-scale. This business needs to be focused on WordPress’ main audience - software end-users. While this business was beginning to come together around the developers who had built WordPress.com, Matt was working on another product which would have a big impact on the WordPress community: an anti-spam plugin called Akismet. 	
		

[^fn-1] CNET went on to be one of the first investors in Automattic.