## 17. Akismet

Spam has always been a problem; it’s the old annoyance of unsolicited mail in your mailbox, but on a huge scale. In the internet age, spam has gone from the actual mailbox to the virtual mailbox, filling inboxes all over the world. Blogs, more than any internet application before them, are notoriously susceptible to spam. This is because comment boxes leave a gap that is open for anyone to enter data. Anything that creates an opportunity for user-entered data, whether that’s a comments box or trackback, is a doorway for spam. 

Spammers leave comments on blogs. Some bloggers receive hundreds or thousands of spam comments. Some spam comments are designed to fool the blogger, they are written with generic flattery that an unsuspecting blogger can take for a genuine comment. They might just say “cool article” or “nice post”. Sometimes the aim is to get an unsuspecting visitor to click a link back to a site, other times its purpose is just to get “link juice” to improve SEO rankings.

WordPress, like every other blogging platform, is susceptible to spam and. in 2005, there were ongoing discussions about how best to deal with comment spam. There were a few plugins around - Spam Karma and Bad Behavior - and Matt was also working on his own anti-spam solution. His first attempt was a JavaScript plugin which modified the comment form and hid fields, but within hours of launching it, it had been downloaded by spammers who figured out how it worked and got around it. This is a pitfall for many anti-spam plugins - once they get traction, it draws the spammers’ attention and they quickly figure out how to get around them. In late 2005 [Matt launched the Akismet plugin for WordPress](http://ma.tt/2005/10/akismet-stops-spam/). Akismet (which stands for Automattic kismet) is a way of dealing with spam in aggregate, a crowd-sourced spam-fighting tool. 		
Each time a comment is posted to your website, it's submitted to Akismet and checked against all of the other comments in the database. If it's spam, it's deleted, if not it lands on your site. If spam gets through and a user marks it as spam, this comment is added to the database. So the pool of spam comments is constantly widening, making Akismet into something that is more effective over time. “It’s like all the kids on the playground ganging up against a bully.” says Matt, “Collectively we all have the data and the information to stop spammers, certainly before they’re able to have a big impact.”  		

In November 2005, there was a discussion on the wp-hackers mailing list [about plugins that could be bundled with core](http://lists.automattic.com/pipermail/wp-hackers/2005-November/003162.html). Top of the list was an anti-spam solution. Akismet was one of the plugins discussed, though [not everyone was comfortable bundling a plugin that had a commercial element to it](http://lists.automattic.com/pipermail/wp-hackers/2005-November/003177.html). Akismet is free for non-commercial use, but commercial users are asked to pay. This is based on an honor system so it is left up to commercial users to be up-front about their website’s intentions. There were questions asked about [the data collected by Akismet and how it was stored](https://codex.wordpress.org/IRC_Meetups/2005/October/October26RawLog). Besides, to use Akismet, a person needed a WordPress.com account: WordPress.com hadn’t officially launched yet. It was still an invite-open service and not every WordPress user had an invite. For those that didn't, they could download the Flock browser but not everyone wanted to download a new browser to get anti=spam

Despite some pushback, there was an [equal amount of support](http://lists.automattic.com/pipermail/wp-hackers/2005-November/003189.html). Not everyone found the pay-what-you-want honor system too jarring. Akismet is a service and has associated server costs. [In November, Akismet was checked in to core](https://core.trac.wordpress.org/changeset/3161). When WordPress 2.0 beta came out that month, it came bundled with Akismet. WordPress users had a new weapon against spam. Not everyone, however, could make use of this new weapon. in order to use it, a person needed a WordPress.com account, and WordPress.com wasn’t yet open to public signups. It didn’t take long for this to be rectified, and two days later, [WordPress.com was open to public signups](http://ma.tt/2005/11/wordpresscom-open/). 		

Concerns continue that a plugin that makes money is shipped with WordPress. People feel that this gives Automattic an unfair advantage. Discussions about whether Akismet should continue to ship with core are returned to perennially in the community, including amongst the core developers and at core team meet ups.  "It seems an unfair advantage and it cuts against WordPress' goal of openness," says Mark Jaquith ([MarkJaquith](http://profiles.wordpress.org/MarkJaquith)), "That being said, spam is still a huge problem and Akismet is still the leading product, even though there are now alternatives."

The open nature of WordPress plugins makes it difficult to develop a widely-adopted anti-spam plugin that doesn’t have some sort of element which isn’t public. As soon as a plugin has wide-spread adoption, spammers learn how it works and get around it. Dealing with spam via a service means that the code can all be open source but the algorithm for dealing with spam need not be. While there are often discussions about adopting a model in which a number of different anti-spam options are recommended, it isn't yet viable. "The moment we recommend five plugins," says Andrew Nacin ([nacin](http://profiles.wordpress.org/nacin)), "the spammers will all target the other four that don’t have the ability to evolve and learn like Akismet does." It creates a challenging intersection between business and free software. Including a freemium plugin with the software doesn't gel completely with the software's openness goals, but, at the same time, taking it away could have a detrimental effect on users, which goes against the project's user-first principles. Akismet continues to be bundled with core, and the issue continues to be discussed.
