## 18. Automattic Launched

With WordPress.com and Akismet launched, they needed a home - a company to keep them up and running and to pay for the work invested by the people involved. WordPress started out like many FOSS projects - code hacked around on in a hacker's spare time, in their bedroom after school, in their basement, in the evening after work. The project brings people together around a common interest. The community grows as people work on the code. More and more users adopt the software. And then the hackers realise that this isn't just a hobby, it could be a business. 

The business model that supports an open source project can determine the success or failure of that project, and vice versa. Between the business and the project, there is a symbiotic relationship: the business generates income and provides contributors and support to the project. The project provides the software which in the bedrock for the business. The business needs to grow in a non-destructive, sustainable way, allowing the project to grow, mature, and continue to attract a diverse group of contributors. 

Running a business alongside a FOSS project in this way presents challenges that a traditional business doesn't need to consider: on the one hand, the business needs to consider investors and employees, on the other, the community of contributors that have no stake in the business but a huge stake in the project. Decisions come under scrutiny from both sides with differing perspectives. Walking the path between the two is a balancing act, and if the founder of the company also happens to be the founder of the project it can become a tightrope.		
In 2005, when Matt was thinking about setting up a business around WordPress, there hadn't yet been a large number of businesses run alongside open source projects. But there were a few, such as Red Hat and the Mozilla Foundation, who had their formative years in 2003-2005, about the same time the WordPress project was taking its first steps.

What companies based around FOSS projects all share is a belief in the power of free and open source software. They all produce software that is free (both as in freedom, and as in beer), and have found ways to generate income while keeping the core software. Making money is just one part of their aim: many want to popularise free and open source software for the benefit of society. And so perhaps it made sense for a business to spring up alongside WordPress, one that shared its commitment to the open web and the democratisation of publishing, a business that would help support and sustain the project. 

In December 2005, when the memory of WordPress Inc was fading, [Automattic was officially launched](http://ma.tt/2005/12/automattic-beta/), a new home for WordPress.com, Akismet, and the developers who had built them. It marked a beginning for its new employees, who now had to balance the aims of the open source project with the commercial concern of the company. It's a balance that has affected both WordPress and Automattic throughout their close histories. 		
Automattic was intended as a startup run along open source principles of distribution, openness, and collaboration. As the project grew so it would support Automattic, and Automattic could put resources back into the project. The company launched with four employees - Donncha O'Caiomh, the original developer of WordPress MU, who was employed to start working on the infrastructure of WordPress.com earlier in June, Ryan Boren, Matt, and Andy Skelton. They all left their jobs and put their faith in WordPress being able to grow beyond being a small project to being a platform that could sustain a blogging business. 		

They were joined in January 2006 by Toni Schneider who was brought on board as CEO, or "adult supervision" as the startup world is fond of saying when an experienced CEO is brought in the shepherd young developers who have struck on a good idea. Toni's was formerly at OddPost, the webmail service that had been bought by Yahoo! He was a developer who became a CEO at a startup which was successfully acquired by one of the net's giants. OddPost became the basis of Yahoo! mail and Toni became a vice president at the company. After setting up the Yahoo! Developer Network, Toni left for new challenges at Automattic. 		
It was at OddPost that Toni had his first exposure to the power of open source projects. At a time when OddPost didn't have a spam filter, Paul Graham came out with his idea of [Bayesian spam filtering](http://www.paulgraham.com/spam.html). He open sourced the idea, and Toni's team implemented it at OddPost. "It just showed me that this is a really powerful model," he recalls.		

He was attracted to Automattic by the challenges of building a product around FOSS software. WordPress already had brand recognition but no one was making money from it yet. In a [2006 interview he said](http://money.cnn.com/2006/04/18/magazines/business2/startuptype/index.htm)		

> WordPress is an interesting new challenge because it's not like most startups, where the world still hasn't heard of you. WordPress is way past that stage. On the other hand, there is no business yet. Until Automattic came along, there was nobody working for it. It was all volunteers. So taking that product momentum and somehow turning that into a business will be really interesting.		

Other aspects of the project attracted Toni: this was a product that wasn't just a central, proprietary service, it wasn't owned solely by anyone, but by all of the people involved, and it was open to anyone getting involved. Users could get involved in the process and have a stake in it, in a way that they couldn't with many of the other services around- Twitter and Facebook, for example. 		

There is power in the fact that anyone could set up a WordPress blog. People are proud that they get it to work. Non-developers can set it up on a server and they feel empowered. It's different to just signing up to a service like Gmail or Facebook; WordPress is something that you can make your own.	

Automattic brought together the founders' experience in FOSS development and Toni's experience in business. There were certain things that worked in the project, that they wanted to maintain within the company, principles of open source development that underpin Automattic.	

The first of these was that the company should be distributed. Contributors to a FOSS project come from all over the world and collaborate together online, finding tools that suit their needs, and building their own when they're unavailable. The internet is perfect for this sort of development. Automattic sought to maintain this distributed nature, enabling it to hire people from all over the world, based on their skills, not on their location. Toni recalls how, in the early days of Automattic, people expected the distributed nature of the company to break down. It went against traditional businesses which kept employees supervised and in one place, with a focus on hours instead of output.		

In order to maintain this distributed nature, many of the early employees came from the project, and were already experienced at working in a distributed environment. Working online came natural to them. Those that found working in this way difficult didn't last at the company. Part of the recruitment process was ensuring that people were made aware of that it's like to work in a distributed environment. Eventually, Automattic developed a trial projects process, whereby potential employees would do a trial, working in the distributed environment to see if the company was the right fit.		

Automattic wanted to maintain a multiple release model, in which developers could push multiple small releases a day straight to the user. They eschewed the traditional [waterfall model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waterfall_model), a development process which involved following a prescriptive sequence: drawing up specifications, design, construction, integration, testing and debugging, installation, and maintenance. At Automattic, developers could write patches and build features and push them straight to users.		
Automattic adopted a [continuous deployment](http://toni.org/2010/05/19/in-praise-of-continuous-deployment-the-wordpress-com-story/) model. By May 2010, Automattic had over 25,000 releases, averaging around 16 releases a day. Rather than optimising for perfection, the process is optimized for speed. Features are broken down into small components and code is incrementally launched. This means that developers and designers can quickly push their products to millions of users within a few second.		
It also helps to ensure that the people who build the product have a direct connection to the customer, doing away with as many levels of mediation as possible. This method of development keeps product people happy because they get to constantly push new ideas to customers, and customers happy because they're constantly getting new toys to play with and their feedback helps to refine the product.		


Following the initial setup of Automattic, the bulk of hiring was done from within the open source project. Seven of the first ten employees of Automattic were from the WordPress community, all of whom had an intimate knowledge of both developing and using the software. Automattic had, at its fingertips, a wealth of developers who were not just experienced in the product, but who were passionate about it and who were committed to it, evidenced already by the fact that they had put considerable volunteer time into it.		
Automattic needed to be careful that the community didn't become disenfranchised from the product. It would have been easy, particularly when Toni was brought on board, for the perception to turn - a business man is brought into the project, people might think that Automattic was going to start charging for things.


From the very start, there was a lack of clarity about what was part of Automattic and what was part of WordPress.	 The two developers who led WordPress were both employees of Automattic, which appeared to make it an Automattic project. It was unclear even on the [original Automattic about page](https://web.archive.org/web/20051224051341/http://www.automattic.com/projects/) which lists WordPress as an Automattic project. 		
Perhaps this was because, at its inception, Automattic was intended as an umbrella company for a number of different organisations, that would include Moebius Ltd and WordPress Inc.  It was also the case that, at that time, much of the work on WordPress was being done by employees at Automattic, particularly through Ryan Boren.

The confusion was compounded by the name of Automattic's blog network: "WordPress.com".  "We gave the company this advantage of being able to call it's service WordPress.com," says Toni. "It's been a curse and a blessing." On the one hand, people are always getting confused between the two, and many people don't even care that there is a difference. It confuses everyone from the press to WordPress users. The mainstream tech press, for example, frequently describes Automattic as the "[maker of WordPress](http://mashable.com/2014/04/09/automattic-acquires-longreads/)", which does a disservice to the hundreds of contributors who aren't at Automattic. The WordPress.org support forums are littered with questions about WordPress.com, and WordPress.com users are confused as to why they can't install plugins. On the other hand, Automattic has put millions of dollars into growing the WordPress brand and introducing the product to people who would instead of gone to Blogger or Tumblr or some alternative blogging service rather than going down the self-hosted route. It's unlikely that the open source project would have had the money or the drive to do such extensive branding. There are many people whose first exposure to WordPress is via WordPress.com, and some of those shift to the open source project. A survey carried out in 2013 by WordPress hosting company WP Engine found that 30% of respondents had heard of WordPress. 
	
Automattic experimented with different ways to make money. Creating an enterprise version was only considered in passing- WordPress itself could run a small personal blog or a huge blogging network like WordPress.com, producing an enterprise version didn’t make sense. Instead they offered support services to enterprise-level clients. Big, prominent sites such as CNET, About.com, and the New York Times were using WordPress, and other sites, such as GigaOm, Techcrunch, and Scobelizer, were shifting to WordPress.com.		
Automattic courted these big sites, initially as a marketing strategy. There is nothing that says "WordPress can scale" better than having big, high-traffic sites, hosted on it. If they run WordPress successfully, then it’s the best possible example that WordPress can run high-traffic, complex websites. Toni approached big websites to offer to host them on WordPress.com. The first included Scobelizer and the second Life Blog. Time was spent making sure that the companies were happy, making sure Akismet was set up, figuring out what plugins they needed, and providing support.

What many of them needed was dedicated support from WordPress experts. At the start, Automattic saw their competitor as Typepad, who charge $49.95 for their enterprise version. Automattic tested different subscription levels. When they [launched the Automattic Support Network](http://toni.org/2006/06/26/automattic-support-network/) their subscription level was $5,000 per year. Also in 2006, they offered enterprise-level hosting - [when WordPress.com VIP hosting launched](http://ma.tt/2006/09/wordpresscom-vip/) it was priced at $250 per month.

It soon became clear that because a piece of software was free, it didn't mean that the services around that software had to be cheap. Companies were prepared to pay enterprise prices to ensure that their website could scale and stay online. Automattic, and other companies in the WordPress ecosystem, just had to develop confidence in building up their pricing structure.		