## 23. Trademarks

In [March 2006 Automattic filed to register the WordPress trademark](http://www.trademarks411.com/marks/78826734). Trademark registrations can be slow processes; the registrant has to demonstrate that they're pro-actively protecting that trademark. Toni Schneider spent much of his early years at Automattic doing just that. He recalls now that he was trying to figure out “how can we make this a very open brand that lots of people can participate in but it doesn’t just turn into some mess that doesn’t mean anything in the marketplace because everybody just uses it in different ways.” The large ecosystem around WordPress can make it difficult for users to know who they’re dealing with. Are they dealing with the official project or someone else? If the WordPress trademark became diluted it would be hard to idenitify official project sites from non-official sites. 		

Just before filing registration, a domain policy was added to WordPress.org. The policy requested that [community members not use WordPress in their domains](https://web.archive.org/web/20060221154915/http://wordpress.org/about/domains/).  This was the first meaningful attempt to protect the trademark. To successfully register a trademark, the owner has to demonstrate that they enforce the trademark consistently. This means setting a consistent standard followed by everyone. For WordPress this meant a domain policy -- a ban on using WordPress in top level domains.

The problem with being permissive with a trademark is that the word or name can, over time, become generic: the meaning of the word changes from being an identifier for a specific product or brand and becomes a generic word. A familiar example of genericization is the word “aspirin”, which has become generic in the United States but is still a registered trademark of Bayer in 80 other countries. The onus is on the trademark owner to protect it and prevent this from happening. Photocopying company Xerox, for example, ran an advertising campaign in an attempt to stop people from using "xerox" as a verb. 
	
Once the trademark application was submitted, Automattic had to go about doing just that. This meant getting people who used WordPress in their domain name or product name to change it. WordPress had been a community project for two years and many people had a stake in it. Many websites used WordPress in their domain names -- some of these were community websites, others were businesses selling WordPress products and services. There was confusion about what people could and couldn’t do. WordPress could not be used in a top level domain, but could community members use WordPress in the name of their blog or website? Was it okay in subdomains? In a comment thread on [Lorelle van Fossen's blog](http://lorelle.wordpress.com/2006/10/26/using-wordpress-in-your-domain-name-dont/), community members wonder whether they can use the label "on WordPress" (as in "Lorelle on WordPress") on their blogs. After lengthy discussion in the comments, Lorelle updated her post to add:

> After many discussions with Matt and the WordPress Community and staff, it is official. It is a violation of trademark to use WordPress in your site’s domain name. You may use it in the title and in blog posts, however, please note that using WP or WordPress in the site title implies the site specializes in WordPress content. Don’t disappoint.		
 
The types of websites affected by this new policy were varied. Everything from community sites to businesses. Websites set up for the community in different locales were particularly affected. WordPress user groups set up their own websites -- wordpress.dk, wordpress.fr, wordpress.jp,[check this one] for example -- which served as community gathering points. They often had translated documentation, links to download localized versions of the software, and support forums where they offered support to people in their own language. There was a general sense among many in the project that the WordPress trademark -- the name and the logo -- did not belong to any individual but to the project itself. This meant that anyone should be able to use it. When the domain policy came into force, people in these communities felt frustrated that it had come as a top-down order, without any real discussion with the community.

The site wordpress-arena.com which was [running a WordPress theme contest](https://web.archive.org/web/20060422014104/http://www.arenawp.com/?p=10), was another site affected by trademark enforcement. After Alex King’s CSS style competition back in 2005, theme competitions continued to be popular in the community. They increased the pool of themes, allowed theme developers to show of their skills, and pushed the boundaries of theme development. In the comments, Matt left a message of support, along with a note that said "Unfortunately for every cool usage (like this competition, potentially) there are a dozen scammers and spammers misusing WordPress, selling spamming scripts or copies of WP itself."		

Six months later, cease and desist letters were sent to people who continued to use WordPress in their domain. Attention centered on two commercial websites that had been running for some time with WordPress in their domain name: [wordpressvideos.com](https://web.archive.org/web/20060402224841/http://wordpressvideos.com/), run by Brandon Hong, and [wordpresstutorials.com](https://web.archive.org/web/20060705071350/http://www.wordpresstutorials.com/), run by Sherman Hu. Both ites were registered prior to WordPress’ trademark policy. These types of domains are more of a challenge to deal with than sites that straightforwardly sell plugins and themes. The main test for whether a website is in violation of a trademark is “likelihood of confusion.” International community sites could easily be confused for the main project, as could sites selling plugins, themes, and other CMSs. Tutorials and books are not one of the main products provided by WordPress so it is more of a gray area. There are similar sites in the Adobe community (photoshoptutorials.ws and photoshopessentials.com, for example) which are not owned by Adobe but which are not seen as trademark violations. 

Sherman Hu and Brandon Hong received cease and desist letters and, as is often the case in the blogging world, a blogger wrote about it. In his post, Andy Beard remarks on Automattic's tardiness in actually registering the trademark and preventing others from using it. He also takes issue with the two sites being singled out: one of them had been online for a year and both provided WordPress services and had cultivated their own communities, they weren't, he felt, the "spammy products" that Matt thought they were. Besides, just a year earlier, there had been a link farm on WordPress.org.		

People jumped to defend the two sites. Even those who supported Automattic's trademark position got angry when Matt branded the two sites as "snake oil.” Customers and friends of Sherman Hu flocked to the blog post to voice their support for Sherman. Outside of that blog, prominent internet marketers wrote about it on their blogs. They took issue with the branding of long-copy sales letters as spammy and scammy. [Brian Clark, at copyblogger, pointed out that while a website's design](http://www.copyblogger.com/does-your-copy-look-spammy/) might not appeal to some people, it will appeal to others. 

Eventually the sites came to an agreement with Automattic. Sherman agreed to add a trademark symbol beside every use of the word WordPress and eventually [WordPress Tutorials came out with a redesign](https://web.archive.org/web/20061130162903/http://www.wordpresstutorials.com/?). Sherman shut the site down in 2008 after moving on to focus on his consulting business.

Since then the WordPress trademark has been consistently enforced. The advantage of Automattic enforcing the trademark was that, as a commercial entity, it was able to put resources into enforcement -- resources that the free software project just didn’t have. The disadvantage was that it looked very much like Automattic was doing it for its own commercial benefit -- not the community’s. It wouldn’t be for a number of years that the trademark situation was properly resolved.
