
In February 2002  Matt Mullenweg (matt) was home from school in Houston, Texas. He sat at his homemade PC, surrounded by posters of his favorite Jazz musicians. With nothing better to do, he got a copy of the Movable Type blogging platform, installed it on a web server and [published his first blog post] (http://ma.tt/2002/02/testing-new-system/).

"I suppose it was just a matter of time before my egotist tendencies combined with my inherit geekiness to create some sort of blog. I've had an unhealthy amount of fun setting this up. This will be a nexus where I talk about and comment on things that interest me, like music, technology, politics, etc. etc."

The title of his blog post, _testing new system_, was like thousands of other first blog posts before him. A post to test out the new platform and to tell the world, "here I am."
A few months later and nearly five thousand miles away, Mike Little (mikelittle) sat in the cellar that was his home office. The cellar of the house had been transformed; tanked, carpeted, and lined with his books and hundreds of CDs. Taking up most of his desk was a 17inch CRT monitor. He had spent his Sunday installing an open source blogging platform, b2. [His first post] (http://zed1.com/journalized/archives/2002/04/21/welcome/), not unlike Matt's, stated his blogging platform and his intent. "There will either be nothing here," he wrote, "or a collection of random thoughts and links. Nothing too exciting. But then again I'm not an exciting person."

These two inauspicious blog posts mark the beginning of not only two blogs, but a blogging platform; not just a blogging platform, but the most widely-used blogging platform and content management system in use today. In different parts of the world, with completely different platforms, two people caught the blogging bug and caught it bad. Not only did they want to publish their content online but soon after setting up their blogs they sought ways to scratch their own itch. They wanted to get their content online faster and more efficiently, create better tools for their websites and for sharing content, to refine the tools that they used, and to share those refinements with the rest of the world.

Matt was born in Houston, Texas on January 11th, 1984. His parents Chuck and Kathe, already had one daughter, Charleen, who was ten years old when Matt was born.

His early blog posts reflect his interests while at school, and later at University. As promised in his first post, he wrote about politics, economics, and technology. Over time his focus shifted; while at University he wrote about philosophy, then shifted more and more toward technology. Entries deal with web standards, coding, and ongoing debates in the technology world.  Interspersed within that are personal posts about the health of his cat, his nights out with friends, and, for a short period of time, a [large amount of puns] (http://ma.tt/2002/10/punaday-10/). Woven into the mix are Matt's early passions - jazz music and photography.

Twenty-two years earlier, and nearly five thousand miles away, Mike Little was born in Manchester, UK, in 1962. He was brought up by his adoptive parents and their daughters, who were ten years older than he. His father worked in a factory and his mother was a doctor's receptionist. The family lived rent-free in the house over the doctor's surgery. Despite always doing well at school, when he reached sixth form, Mike lost interest in his academic studies and dropped out of school. His first job was at a TV aerial installation company where he wired electronics, but his growing passion was music. It is in music and computing where Matt and Mike, despite their different backgrounds, start to share similarities. For both of them, music was one of the elements that led to their work online. Both had earlier experience with computers, but it was music that propelled them further along that path.
  
Matt's interest in computers began when he was a kid. His father, Chuck, was a computer programmer and there were always computers in the house. His first computing experience was an Atari game called - Winnie the Pooh and the Hundred Acre Wood. He graduated from these to role-playing games such as Ultima online. His computer experience developed as he got older. On _take your son to work day_, and on occasional Saturdays, Chuck took Matt to work with him and Matt played around on computers all day. He started learning to take computers apart and put them back together.

While he was at high school Matt started to make money from computers. While studying at the High School for the Performing and Visual Arts (HSVPA), he got interested in building computers and websites. He built computers for his saxaphone teacher, David Caceres and other musicians around Houston. He graduated from building computers to building websites. Under the business name [SWC] (http://web.archive.org/web/20020401182611/http://www.swcdesign.com/) he built websites for local companies, including [David Caceres] (http://web.archive.org/web/20020329153221/http://davidcaceres.com/). While at school he connected with other music fans in the Houston area on the internet. He set up a [forum on David Caceres'] (http://web.archive.org/web/20020202222327/http://davidcaceres.com/forum/) website. To ask questions and learn more about building websites, he signed up for SitePoint, where he was active on the forums under the username [allusion] (http://www.sitepoint.com/forums/member.php?12622-allusion), a username that would stay with him through the first few years of the WordPress.org forums.

Mike also reached computing via music. His very first exposure, however, to computers did not work out so well. While in sixth form at school, he had a free period each week during which he could choose what to do. He and some friends decided to go to the local college and try programming. At that point there wasn't even a screen - the boys typed on a keyboard and output spat out the back on printed paper. One of Mike's friends decided to use his time on the computer to smoke. The boys got caught -- the teacher was furious that they had smoked around so much paper, and this brought Mike's very first foray into programming to a close.

He returned to programming, however, in 1982. The music scene in Manchester and Stockport in the late 1970s and early 1980s was thriving.  An influential performance by The Sex Pistols at the Lesser Free Trade Hall fuelled Manchester's music scene. People like Peter Hook and Bernard Sumner (Joy Division), Morrissey (The Smiths), and Tony Wilson (Factory Records) were in the audience. It was in this punk, post-punk, and new wave atmosphere that Mike gave up his aerial job and started working in a record shop. At the center of the music scene, he was able to get gig tickets and saw Joy Division and Cabaret Voltaire. He handed out 'zines for then-don of the Manchester music scene, Tony Wilson.

During that period, Mike lived with a local band called Belgian Bitch, and it was through them that computing came back into his life. Glam rock was the new thing, and the lead singer thought it would be cool to have stacks of televisions with graphics on either side of the stage. Mike borrowed a ZX Spectrum and used a couple of programs from  computing magazines: one of them bounced objects around the screen, the second created 3D text. He hacked until he got the words he wanted to bounce around a screen, but the plan finally fell flat when they couldn't figure out how to output the program to multiple screens at the same time. Despite not being a total success, this incident further cemented his reputation for being the go-to guy for all things computing and music.

Mike's first programming experience took place twenty years before he met Matt. The music scene in Manchester eventually went on a long hiatus but Mike continued to learn to program. He moved onto an 8bit Atari, and started programming using Emacs on a 16bit Atari ST. It was when he was running a video rental shop that he finally bought a PC. Bought for running the shop, it was a 640k monochrome computer (also known as a green screen) with a 20mb hard drive, that cost £3,000. Mike got himself a copy of Turbo Pascal on some 5.25 inch floppies, installed it, and taught himself programming in earnest.

He fell in love with programming, enjoying the challenges, and problem solving. He learned Basic, 6502 Assembler, Pascal, and Object-Oriented Pascal, and then learned C on production software once he started coding professionally. He learned PHP, the language which WordPress would be written in, during the transition between PHP versions one and two. PHP often gets criticized, but for Mike, much of it is unwarranted. "I know a lot of languages now," he says "They're all just syntax for me. Any modern language - so anything in the last 20 years - allows you to write good code. Many of them allow you to write really crap code as well. People who complain about PHP as if it forces you to write bad code either don't understand that beginners will always write bad code no matter what language they use or they haven't got the discipline to write good code."

With his experience of PHP, b2 was the natural platform for Mike to start blogging with. For one, it was written in PHP with a MySQL database. For another, it was licensed under the GNU General Public License, a free software license that encouraged software distribution and hacking. Mike had already contributed to open source projects, such as MySQL, was a follower of the author of the GPL, Richard Stallman, and was an advocate of free software. The other open source platform that was available at that time, [Greymatter] (http://www.greymatterforums.com/), was written in Perl and wasn't easy to install. For Matt, too, a platform written in PHP made more sense than using the Perl-based Movable Type - Matt had already had experience hacking PHP when working on the forums for David Caceres. It wasn't long, therefore, after setting up his blog that he shifted platforms from Movable Type.

Blogging, while not quite in its infancy, was still maturing. In 1998, a few years before Matt and Mike entered the blogosphere, there were just a handful of what could be called weblogs. Often, these were curated collections of links with snarky or sarcastic commentary. They provided a filtering function, pre-surfing the web for readers who could browse through links on weblogs that they trusted. One of the earliest bloggers, [Justin Hall] (http://www.links.net/), [collected links] (http://www.links.net/www/index.html) to the darkest corners of the internet. In addition to sharing the weirdest things he found on the internet, Hall was one of the first people to pour his personal life into his online diary, sharing everything of himself with the net, which culminated in a [breakdown video] (http://www.links.net/daze/05/01/14/dark_night_flick.html).

Rebecca Blood noted this transition from linklog to personal diary  in 2000, when she wrote [an early history of blogging] (http://www.rebeccablood.net/essays/weblog_history.html). In her article, she talks about traditional weblogs as a curated collection of links, as opposed to blogging as the new form. Blogs transformed from "a list of links with commentary and personal asides to a website that is updated frequently, with new material posted at the top of the page." This is the type of blog that we're familiar with today. Blogging software publishes content with the most recent at the top of the page. When a visitor lands, they get to see the latest post. This original premise of self-publishing on the web has continued throughout the history of blogging from the earliest online diaries to weblogs to tumblogs and even to microblogging such as Twitter. We've become accustomed to the most recent content first, have been conditioned to identify the publication of personal thoughts when we see it.

Many of the first bloggers were those already involved with the web, software developers like Dave Winer, designers like Jeffrey Zeldman, and technologists like Anil Dash. This meant that much of the earliest blog content was about the web and technology, interspersed with more diffuse thoughts and commentary about the blogger's life. Bloggers often had a tendency toward meta-commentary and would write about the tools [used to write their blogs] (http://scripting.com/1997/11/24.html) and the [improvements that they made to their sites] (http://dashes.com/anil/1999/08/pulldown-menus.html). While blogging had a steady growth during this period, the community was still considered geeky and insular. [Journalists spoke disparagingly of bloggers](http://www.nytimes.com/2002/05/05/books/the-close-reader-at-large-in-the-blogosphere.html) and rarely took their reporting seriously.

In 2001, blogging started to permeate the public consciousness. American political blogs became popular in the wake of the September 11th attacks on the World Trade Centre and the Pentagon. Blogs such as [Instapundit] (http://pjmedia.com/instapundit/) and [The Daily Dish] (http://dish.andrewsullivan.com/) saw a massive surge in popularity. Andrew Sullivan, the blogger behind The Daily Dish, [said that] (http://sullivanarchives.theatlantic.com/culture.php)  people didn't come to his blog just for news; "They were hungry for communication, for checking their gut against someone they had come to know, for emotional support and psychological bonding."

This was one of the first indications of the power of blogging - it gave people a voice online, provided a platform where people could come together to grieve.  In his book _Say Everything: How Blogging Began, What It's Becoming, and Why it Matters_, Scott Rosenburg talks of how, despite the burst of the dot-com bubble, the final quarter of 2001 saw an increase in blogging. "Something strange and novel had landed on the doorstep," Rosenburg writes in his introduction, "the latest monster baby from the Net. Newspapers and radio and cable news began to take note and tell people about it. That in turn sent more visitors to the bloggers' sites, and inspired a whole new wave of bloggers to begin posting." Since that time blogging, and later social media, has played a pivotal role in politics, public life, and even revolutions.

The evolution of blogging was mirrored in the tools that enabled bloggers to get their content online. Services like Geocities and Tripod enabled anyone to create a website, but these sites had little in common with the dynamic stream of content on a blog. People created the earliest blogs manually, using HTML and FTP. Justin Hall, on his weblog, had a page titled [Publish Yo' Self] (http://www.links.net/webpub/) which claimed that "HTML is easy as hell!" and taught people how to write HTML and publish it online. However, this was still a barrier to entry and programmers sought a way to make it easier. The dream was to create a tool that would let people write content and publish it to the web with one click. Dave Winer, whose popular [Scripting News] (http://scripting.com/) was one of the earliest blogs, set up UserLand Software which developed [Frontier NewsPage] (http://scripting.com/frontier/netScripting/newsPage.html), a tool that enabled people to create news-oriented websites like Scripting News.

However, not everyone wanted to recreate Scripting News and besides, if you weren't already familiar with the internet, setting up your own hosting and running the tool would still have been a complex task. In 1998, [Open Diary,] (http://www.opendiary.com/) an online community where people could write their diary online and communicate with other diarists, launched. Then came [LiveJournal] (http://www.livejournal.com/) and [Pitas.com] (http://www.pitas.com/) in 1999. In the same year, [Pyra Labs launched] (http://evhead.com/1999/08/we-just-launched-cool-new-tool-at-pyra.asp) [Blogger] (http://blogger.com). Blogger automated publishing a blog to a web server: the user would write their content, and Blogger uploaded the page to the server after each post. Blogger is often credited with popularizing blogging. The following year, Dave Winer released [Radio UserLand] (http://radio.userland.com/).

Movable Type, the platform which would be one of WordPress' biggest competitors, launched in 2001. Ben and Mena Trott originally built Movable Type for Mena's personal use. While Blogger was easy to use, it was limited in its functionality - it lacked post titles, rich text editing, and categories, for example - so the Trotts set out to create something different for [Mena's blog] (http://www.dollarshort.org/). In 2001, they were both laid off from their jobs. With time on their hands they were able to refine their tool and make it ready to bring to the masses. In October, they launched Movable Type and it quickly became the most popular blogging platform, used by many of the major blogs at the time, including Instapundit, Wonkette, and Boing Boing. In many ways, Movable Type raised the bar for blogging platforms. It was not simply a publishing platform, but was a publishing platform that people wanted to use. Anil Dash is quoted [in Salon] (http://www.salon.com/2004/08/09/six_apart/) saying, "The very first thing that caught my eye was that it was very elegant. I said 'I want my site to look like that.' It was elegant all the way through, and the features -- really basic stuff, like I wanted comments and categories and titles on my posts. I mean that wasn't a common thing then, you couldn't put a title on your post. Really basic stuff like that, and they got all that together in one tool, in a way that worked."

Once bloggers were able to publish online using tools like Blogger and Movable Type, the next step was for the tools to evolve. The tools needed to be better, and communication and sharing needed to improve. Publishing content just wasn't enough. Blogrolls were an early example of this functionality. Blogrolls were lists of blogs that the blog author read. They would typically display them in their sidebar. It served two purposes: to display the blogging tribe you belonged to, and to give "link love" to the author's favorite blogs.

Permalinks and Trackbacks were two early developments in blogging. _Permalink_ is a portmanteau of _permanent link_ - it points to the specific blog post in the archive. With the rise of blogging, webpages went from being static to dynamic. A blog entry would only be on the front page of the site for a short period of time. Permalinks enabled visitors to have a direct link to the article that they could use to return to. Trackbacks are a linkback method Six Apart introduced in Movable Type. A trackback is a ping sent from a site that links to another. The site that receives the ping can publish the acknowledgement on their website. This was a way to facilitate communication between blogs. If a blogger had written about your article, they could send a trackback.

These changes and improvements were iterative steps toward bringing people together from totally different backgrounds, in different locations -- providing them with a virtual locale in which they could create, work together, and sometimes produce something unexpected. WordPress' creation is one of those moments when, in a small pocket of the internet, the right people connected. They may have been from completely different backgrounds, but a shared love on creating tools, playing with code, and publishing online, brought them together.

b2 was the platform that connected Matt and Mike. It was through publishing hacks and tips on their blogs, and encountering each other on the support forums, that they had their first interactions. And it is in b2 that we can find the origins of WordPress, before it was WordPress, and before Matt or Mike had considered writing their own blogging software. In June 2001, before either of them had written their first blog post, a developer in Corsica started [development of his own blogging platform] (http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2001/06/post1958/). He touted it as a "PHP+MySQL alternative to Blogger and Greymatter." It's in that post that WordPress' history truly begins, 18 months before any talk of forks, before anyone had thought that combining the words "Word" and "Press" was a suitable name for a blogging platform. It's not in Stockport or Houston that WordPress' roots entirely lie -- the real beginning was miles away on the French island of Corsica.

The village of Cervione clings to the side of Mont de Castelli, one of the hundreds of mountains that stretch over the island of Corsica. The main part of the town rests in a natural amphitheatre, while houses are scattered down the mountainside toward the long stretch of beach. The blistered, stone buildings look eastward, many perched at the edge of huge precipices giving the inhabitants a clear view to the green, rolling hills below and beyond that the blue expanse of the Mediterranean.  Inside Cervione, the narrow streets are a cobbled maze of alleys and arches. The dates of the buildings span centuries, shuttered windows flake with paint, and houses lean, holding each other up.

In 2000, in a small apartment above a bar across the square from the Cathédrale St-Érasme, Michel Valdrighi was writing a blog post. The self-titled "only blogger in Corsica" worked on a dial-up AOL connection that disconnected every thirty minutes. When he tried to reconnect over the crowded network, it could take hours to get back online. He lived in the apartment with his cats, No Name and Gribouille, who perched on a windowsill that looked out over a high drop and [whose antics he captured on his blog](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2000/12/post1447/). Like many bloggers, Michel captured minor incidents in his life, using his blog to write about not only his cats, but his job, his colleagues, technology, and neopets.

Michel was introduced to the internet while at University in 1999. He spent his first month hanging out in IRC chatrooms before he opened up Notepad and learned to make websites using HTML table-based design. Making static sites quickly got boring  and a friend in an IRC chat room told him that he had discovered a tool that made it possible to automatically update his website. It even handled archives and, best of all, wasn't a hosted service, which, at that time, were notorious for disappearing, along with all of their users' data. Blogger seemed to be the answer. It provided two iframes, one at the top and one at the bottom, a text area, and a submit button. But it meant he could get his content online quickly.

There were, however, issues with Blogger. For one, it didn't have a built-in comment system. Michel signed up for two different commenting services, both of which disappeared along with all of the comments and discussions on his blog. Stability was another issue with Blogger. As its popularity grew it became more and more unstable. People started to joke that it was "sometimes up."

Michel's first job was at a development shop in Corsica where he built websites for local businesses. In his spare time  he wrote on his blog and played around with web development. In December 2000, [Michel started to learn PHP](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2000/12/post1380/).

The experience taught Michel that he could use PHP to manipulate data,  inspiring him to build his own blogging script. The following month, in June 2001, [Michel started developing b2] (http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2001/06/post1958/), a piece of blogging software that he described as a "PHP+MySQL alternative to Blogger and Greymatter." In his blog post he wrote:

> Not much new ideas in it, but it will feature stuff like a built-in comment system, good users management (with complete profile etc), user-avatars (got piccies ?), multiple ways of archiving your blog (even post by post if you like to do a kind of journal) (SIC).

> The installation will be easy, just edit a config file, upload everything and launch the install script. And there you go, but you'd like an admin control panel? It will be there, packed with options.

> Ooh la la.

The first thing he needed was a name. He wanted "blog" or "blogger" in the title. At the time, he was listening to "Song 2" by the British band Blur on repeat. He combined the two, making "blog2," then "blogger2," until he got to b2.

The PHP and MySQL combination was a good alternative to the way other contemporary blogging systems were set up. Movable Type, for example, rebuilt the page every time someone left a comment or edited the page, making for slow page-load times. b2, on the other hand, was built to be an easy-to-use, speedy weblogging tool. "You type something and hit "blog this" and in the next second it's on your page(s)," [reads the sidebar of cafelog.com](http://cafelog.com/). It goes on, "Pages are generated dynamically from the MySQL database, so no clumsy 'rebuilding' is involved. It also means faster search/display capabilities, and the ability to serve your news in different 'templates' without any hassle." This was what Michel would go on to achieve with b2. These features were part of the reason that Matt, Mike, and so many other bloggers wanted to use the software. But Michel was an admittedly novice developer, learning PHP and MySQL while building the precursor to one of the most widely-used blogging and CMS platforms in use today. He [recalls now](http://wordpress.tv/2012/02/27/les-origines-de-wordpress-la-naissance-de-b2cafelog/) that as a fledgling PHP coder he didn't always do things the right way:

> When you look at WordPress's code and think 'Wow, that's weird, why did they do that this way?', well often that's because they kept doing things the way they were done in b2, and I sucked at PHP.

Michel, like Matt and Mike, started out by scratching his own itch, developing features he needed for his blog. He wanted to build a blogging tool, as opposed to a CMS, so he focused on blogging functionality. He felt that features not directly related to getting blog content on the web, such as media uploads and photo galleries, weren't a priority. The aim of b2 was to create a frictionless way for a person to blog. With this in mind, he started developing posting functionality and adding minor enhancements to make writing easier. [AutoBR](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=19&c=1), was added, for example, to add a <br/> tag every time a writer hits enter to create a new line. Once post editing was complete, Michel [enabled users to set their own timezone](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=22&c=1), and [worked on a templating system](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=24&c=1). Like Matt would after him, Michel was already concerned with making b2 as usable as possible for all users. "Some template routines are showing," [he wrote](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=30&c=1), "and that's a big thing to do to make templates customizable by Joe Newbie. I don't want to have these horrible things you can see on GreyMatter." Templating continued to be his major concern over the next couple of days. He got the post author name and time showing on the post, and later that day [completed his work on the initial templating system for b2](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=32&c=1). Over the next month he added an [options](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=39&c=1) page, [archives](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=45&c=1), and [comments](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=46&c=1).

By the end of June 2001, Michel was [ready to say goodbye to Blogger](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2001/06/post1909/), and move his blog to b2. He also set up a website for b2, originally a subdomain of his dayzero.org blog, (later, his blog would be moved to zengun.org), before it was moved to cafelog.com. A few days after moving his blog, [he released the first version of b2](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=60&c=1). Soon after that, he [wrote about the second site running b2](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2001/07/post270/), the [personal weblog of a schoolboy called Russell](http://web.archive.org/web/20020718211541/http://russell.bustakartoon.com/).

Cafelog.com was a gathering place for the nascent community. Michel allowed people to register for the blog and once he trusted them, he would enhance their privileges, allowing them to post on the blog and even become admins. Their first posts usually involved a "Woo hoo" and a [plug for their own website](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=21&c=1). These sorts of "[shameless plugs](http://www.cafelog.com/index.php?p=29&c=1)" were often the only posts that people actually made on the blog, a useful trick for getting some linkback love and traffic to their personal blog.

Development didn't always go smoothly. Brigitte Eaton, who ran a site called [Eatonweb](http://portal.eatonweb.com/), was the first prominent b2 user. Eatonweb is a hand-maintained list of blogs, which was a go-to place for discovering new blogs until the number of blogs exploded and hand maintaining a list became untenable. Hand-maintained link lists were eventually superseded by the ubiquitous blogroll, and services like Technorati which started ranking blogs according to incoming links. Brigitte Eaton wrote a lot of content, publishing to her blog regularly. When she imported her blog into b2 she found that the more posts she added, the slower the blog got. At that time, Michel had no idea how to write code for retrieving months from the archives so he wrote some code to parse through every post on the blog, that would query whether the post had changed, and then display it. For blogs with large amounts of posts, this meant a huge workload on the server which would quickly slow down the website.

The first major code contribution to the project was [pingback functionality](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=490&c=1), from a developer called [Axis Thoreau](http://web.archive.org/web/20020921055340/http://mort.mine.nu:8080/b2/), who went by the handle Mort. Pingback is a linkback method which authors use to request notifications when someone links to their website. An author writes a post on their blog that links to a post elsewhere. The original site sends a XML-RPC request and when the mentioned site receives the notification signal, it goes back to the original site to check for the link. If it exists then the pingback is recorded. A blogging system can then automatically publish a list of links in the comment section of the post, or wherever the developer wants to place it.

Similar linkback functionality, called trackback, was included in Movable Type. Michel had included a version of this in b2. He [used the introduction](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2002/08/trackback-in-b2/) to trackback on the Movable Type website, and looked at the Perl code to see the data that was being passed to the trackback URL. Trackback is a ping sent from the original author's site to a site they've written about, when a hyperlink is included. Unlike pingbacks, trackbacks are manual so the original author has to choose to send the trackback, and can edit the excerpt sent. Trackbacks are much more susceptible to spam than pingbacks. Spam pings are pings sent from spam blogs to get links on other websites. Whereas pingbacks ping back to the original site to verify that it is not spam, the same checks are not carried out by trackback.

As b2 expanded, the community followed suit. While b2 largely remained Michel's pet project, there was a community of users and developers on the forums. The forums became a haven for people asking for help with the software. Many of the queries were around design as people sought help to make their website look good. Developers helped each other out with hacks for b2. Some of the early WordPress developers had their first interactions on the b2 forums. Both Matt and Mike actively helped out other users, and Mike was known for helping other developers with their hacks.
The article also highlights another important aspect - people liked using b2. It allowed them to publish to their blog without any hassle, which was Michel's intention. "If you are a user of this product," writes Jim, "please don't tell me about how cool it is, or about how well it works. If you read a site powered by this engine, please don't tell me about how easy you find it to use." Which was the point: people did find it easy to use. To users it didn't matter what was going on under the hood. It may have had its problems but it was a frictionless way of getting content online. Where users went, developers followed; even better if those users were novice developers themselves, fumbling round at the edges of PHP, learning what they could do with code, what new functionality they could add to their website, and share with other users. Even in these very early days, b2's development demonstrated the schism between developer-focused development and user-focused development. On the one hand a focus on logical, beautifully written code, on the other a focus on features that users wanted.
In his absence, b2 came under criticism from the wider web development community. Michel's lack of coding experience showed, especially to experienced developers. One blogger, Jim Reverend, wrote a post titled ["Cafelog: A Look at Bad Code"](http://revjim.net/2002/12/21/cafelog-a-look-at-bad-code/). In it Jim bemoans poor code quality in publicly released software. He concentrated particularly on b2, saying b2 lacked the features he needed in a blogging platform and used "poor coding practices." For Jim, b2 was lacking in a number of ways: it didn't cache calls to the database so when there was a new visit from a user, the page had to be loaded from the database and server, slowing down the website. He also complained about the lack of flexibility in the templating system and the lack of cruft-free URLS (known in WordPress lingo now as "pretty permalinks"). 

But Jim's biggest issue - also an issue for other developers - was poor coding practices. Michel's lack of PHP experience meant that he wrote inefficient code and used techniques counter-intuitive to a more experienced coder. Michel's code reflected a developer learning PHP. Rather than taking a modular approach to solve a logic problem, the code grew organically, written as Michel thought about it. Code wasn't so much a tool to solve a problem, but a tool to get the newest feature on the screen. This created multiple code interdependencies which could cause problems for developers new to the project. A line of code would change, and break something that appeared unrelated. For Jim, this type of "dirty code" was unforgivable; "What I do have a problem with," he writes, "is my inability to use his code (without extensive reading and rewriting) to implement my own features." A cornerstone of open source software is to write extensible code. If code is written in a stream-of-consciousness fashion, lacking in best practices, it can be difficult for other developers to extend.

Counterintuitively, it wasn't all bad, and in the context of WordPress the code quality could even be seen as a benefit. In a follow-up article, [Jim Reverend concedes](http://revjim.net/2003/01/03/cafelog-a-few-more-thoughts/) that there are some benefits to such poorly written code:

> While programmers like myself start convulsing when we have to wade through such code, less experienced programmers actually like it, because it is easier for them to work with. Because the "template functions" are in the global namespace, they work anywhere. Because the data returned by the database is in a global variable, you don't have to use any tricks to get at it. It makes extending, enhancing, and modifying the code easier for newbies.

Michel's inexperience meant that the code had a level of simplicity that made it easy for other novice developers to understand. Whereas a more experienced developer might write complex code, Michel often took the simplest route to solve a problem. "In a way it was beautiful because it was so simple," says developer Alex King, [alexkingorg](http://profiles.wordpress.org/alexkingorg/), "It wasn't elegant but it was very straightforward and very accessible. For someone who didn't have a lot of development experience coming in - like me - it was very comfortable understanding what was going on."

When deciding what to license b2 under, Michel spent a lot of time going back and forth. The free software movement was relatively young and many large projects had their own license terms (such as Apache, PHP, X.Org). Michel felt that until he had settled on a license he would just let it be covered under regular copyright. Michel would then be able to determine what other people could do with his code. 

On the b2 blog, it's possible to follow the progress of the appearance of the GPL in b2. In August 2001, Michel made a brief statement on cafelog.com, telling people that they could use his code provided he was given credit for it, stating explicitly that "b2 isn't released under the GPL yet." People were starting to take notice of b2 and within a few months they were passing it off as their own. In October, a Norwegian agency claimed to own the copyright to b2 and Michel was forced to contact the Norwegian copyright agency. In the discussion around this incident, Michel made a statement that came as close to a license as he'd got so far:

> You can use b2 for free, even if your site is of commercial nature. You're welcomed to buy me items from my Amazon.com wishlist if you're going to make much money from your b2-powered site or if you just like b2.

> You can edit b2's source code.

> You can re-distribute a modified or original version of b2. In no way your modifications make you author or co-author of the modified version, I'll remain b2's sole author and copyright holder.

> Any help is welcomed. Feel free to submit fixes and enhancements, they might get in b2's code and your name or email address will be there as credit in the source code.

> I guess this makes a b2 license for now.

b2 continued to be released under this slapdash license for a few months but he soon realised that b2 needed an official license so he started looking in earnest. It was important to Michel that b2 remain free, even if he stopped working on the project himself, or if someone else took the code and used it for their own project, so he rejected the MIT/BSD licenses and their derivatives. The PHP license was a BSD derivative which he also rejected because it had clauses saying that redistribution had to include an acknowledgement of the original project. He recalls now that "at the end of that elimination process, GPL remained. It helped that there were already some projects using it, as I didn't want the code to end up abandoned and forgotten because of the choice of an exotic license." With his own eventual disappearance from the project, Michel's choice of license was prescient. With a GPL license, b2 could be forked, modified, and redistributed, which is exactly what Mike and Matt did.

All went well until May 2002 when [Michel lost his job](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2002/05/jobless/). In the months following, he continued to keep up development on b2, but he [struggled with depression and health issues](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2002/08/back/), had his [electricity cut off](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2002/08/they-cut-my-arms/), [moved house](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2002/08/its-that-time-of-the-year-again/), and [struggled to find a job](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2002/10/untidy/). With so much going on his life, Michel eventually disappeared from the web. He [posted about spam in December 2002](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2002/12/spam-the-blogosphere/) and didn't post on his personal blog throughout 2004.

The users of b2 were without a lead developer. There was no one steering the project, making fixes, or adding new features. People were concerned about Michel - they liked him and were worried about what had happened to him. In March 2003, a [discussion thread started on cafelog.com](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=499&c=1), asking about Michel's whereabouts. Michel's sister, Senia, posted that he was well and that he was looking for a job. She promised to ask him to connect to IRC and MSN. The responses to Senia were mixed.

One commenter said:

> Please pass on to Michel that not only has he created a really nice piece of software, but he has also inadvertently built a community [...] of people, a sort of commonwealth on the blogosphere. I don't know him the slightest bit, but I wish him well and hope that any soul searching or vision quest (or vision exodus?!) he has embarked on helps him find what he needs. Yet also allows him to tie up any loose ends that he leaves behind.

Others had concerns about their own projects:

> Anyone heard from Michel yet? His last post was 6 weeks ago. I want to install and promote b2 in two projects (one affiliated with a UN women's project).. but I am nervous about doing so if there will be no developer support available. I am sure he knows that b2 is including in the Fantastico auto-installer bundled with the cPanel virtual hosting tool. I want to write an blogging article for hosting clients. Michel? You going to be around?

A well-worn phrase in the open source world is "scratching your own itch." This means creating the tools that you need to use, whether that's a blogging platform, a text editor, or an operating system. By being both the developer of the software and its user, the developer knows whether the tools they create meet their real needs. The developers are the users. When they write code, they use it just as any user would. They know what works and what doesn't. Scratching an itch gives the developer a closer relationship with the software's users, it's grass-roots development, bottom-up as opposed to top-down. It's been a feature throughout open source software development, and at the start of the century lots of bloggers were feeling itchy.


Building own platform:

In the midst of the discussion about b2's poor code, a number of developers started to talk about building their own blogging platform. Jim Reverend floated the [idea of inklog](http://revjim.net/2003/01/03/inklog-its-what-youve-always-wanted/), a weblogging platform built using PHP. He proposed using the model-view-controller (MVC) software architecture model to build the platform. This eventually morphed into an [application framework](http://revjim.net/2004/01/22/inklog-what-is-it-part-2/), before morphing further into a [Rails project](http://revjim.net/2005/02/22/inklog-redux-on-rails/). Jim wasn't the only developer who wanted to create his own blogging platform. In November 2002, Dougal Campbell, [dougal](http://profiles.wordpress.org/dougal), who would go on to be one of the first developers of WordPress, [floated the idea of writing his own blogging software](http://dougal.gunters.org/blog/2002/11/12/software-development/). He wasn't a b2 user, though he had looked into using b2 for his blog. Finding it lacking, he proposed dBlog. He wanted a number of key features in in his blogging software, including security, connectivity to other blogging platforms, and content separated from presentation. Finally, Dougal wanted configurability - dBlog would have a rich API enabling developers to extend it. Unlike Jim, but like many of the other people that talked  about writing their own blogging platform, Dougal never went ahead with it. After all, there were platforms around that were just good enough, and developers could hack them into working according to their own needs.


Meanwhile, in France, Francois Planque [forked b2 to create b2evolution](http://fplanque.net/Blog/devblog/2003/05/10/b2_evolution_new_features_summary). Like the WordPress developers, the lack of b2 development frustrated Francois and he wanted to continue to develop b2 for his own needs. Over in Cork, on the west coast of Ireland, Donncha Ó Caoimh, [donncha](http://profiles.wordpress.org/donncha/), was working on his own multi-user project, b2++. Donncha discovered b2 while searching for a platform to create a blog network for his Linux user group. He found b2 small, basic, and easy to modify. With b2 as his starting point, he made major modifications to [create blogs.linux.ie](http://web.archive.org/web/20030302025915/http://blogs.linux.ie/). b2++'s templating system used [Smarty](http://www.smarty.net/), which separated code and presentation, making it easier for users on the network to change their site's design. Donncha didn't consider b2++ as a fork of b2\. "A fork gives the impression that it was competing --- it wasn't competing because most of the things it did was add multi-user aspects to the project." b2 was a platform aimed at individual bloggers, but everything that Donncha did in b2++ created a better multi-user environment.


It's not enough to create a piece of software, release it, and put it out there. It needs to be maintained - bugs need to be fixed, new features need to be added. The software needs to evolve along with the internet. b2 was a good platform, but without someone to fix bugs and add new features it was quickly becoming vaporware. And the software wasn't the only thing that had been abandoned - the community was adrift too. In the open source world, the community is as important as the software. The community is the garden in which the software grows and matures.  Community members submit patches, fix issues, support users, write documentation, and do all of the things that software needs to flourish. But every project needs a person, or group of people, to commit patches, decide on new features, and generally steer the project. When that person disappears without a trace, community members can play around the edges, helping out with support and making hacks, but, without someone to step up and take that person's place, the community quickly dissolves. People move to other projects, or start their own. After all, if the person who owns the project shows no commitment, how can commitment be expected from anyone else?

--

By January 2003, b2 was dormant. Michel, [michelvaldrighi](http://profiles.wordpress.org/michelvaldrighi), hadn't been online for months and no one was maintaining b2\. The blogging software at the core of the growing community was no longer evolving. The web, and blogging, was moving forward, but b2 had lost its driving force. The community was concerned. [Michel blogged at the end of December 2002](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2002/) and then didn't post again until 2004\. Where was he? Was he okay?

On his blog, [Matt](http://profiles.wordpress.org/matt) wrote a post called "[The Blogging Software Dilemma](http://ma.tt/2003/01/the-blogging-software-dilemma/)," in which he first mentioned forking b2; the post that led to the creation of WordPress. At the time, he was concerned about his website's forward compatibility. [Jeffrey Zeldman](http://www.digital-web.com/articles/999_of_websites_are_obsolete/)'s _Forward Compatibility: Designing and Building with Standards_ had influenced his thinking. Zeldman's book covered how to create standards-compliant websites that would work across browsers and devices. Matt had already converted most of his site to XHTML 1.1, but none of this mattered with b2 dormant. Michel's disappearance, however, didn't have to mean the end of the software. Matt wrote:

> "b2/cafelog is GPL, which means that I could use the existing codebase to create a fork, integrating all the cool stuff that Michel would be working on right now if only he was around. The work would never be lost, as if I fell of the face of the planet a year from now, whatever code I made would be free to the world, and if someone else wanted to pick it up they could. I've decided that this (sic) the course of action I'd like to go in, now all I need is a name. What should it do? Well, it would be nice to have the flexibility of Movable Type, the parsing of Textpattern, the hackability of b2, and the ease of setup of Blogger. Someday, right?"

The next day, from Stockport, UK, Mike Little, [mikelittle](http://profiles.wordpress.org/mikelittle), responded:

> "If you're serious about forking b2 I would be interested in contributing. I'm sure there are one or two others in the community who would be too. Perhaps a post to the b2 forum, suggesting a fork would be a good starting point."

Maybe include some background on forks

He had tried Movable Type before moving to b2\. He hadn't been happy with the platform --- it didn't have pingbacks, which was functionality he was fond of, and comments were in pop-ups as opposed to being inline. Also Movable Type was written in Perl with a DBD database, and Matt was more comfortable with PHP and MySQL. When it came to making alterations, it was easier for him to do so in b2\. Dean Allen's Textpattern, was another option. At that time it wasn't GPL so Matt didn't feel comfortable backing it. (Textpattern was later [released with a GPL license in June 2004](http://forum.textpattern.com/viewtopic.php?id=2102).) Blogger involved using FTP which put another barrier between writing and publishing. With Michel gone and Matt's PHP skills growing, forking b2 was the obvious solution.

By blogging about forking b2 and asking the question openly, he was inviting a community on board. From the other side of the world, Mike Little wanted to get involved. For Matt and Mike, forking was a way to continue to use the software, and develop it for their own needs. On April 1st, 2003, Matt created a [new branch of b2 on SourceForge](http://cafelog.cvs.sourceforge.net/viewvc/cafelog/), and, with the name coined by his friend Christine Tremoulet, called it WordPress.