## 3. The Blogging Software Dilemma

One of the positive aspects of the internet has always been its ability to bring together people from different backgrounds around a common interest. The b2 community was a small corner of the internet where this happened, foreshadowing what would happen with WordPress in the coming years. People supported one another because they were interested in two things - blogging and blogging software. 

The founders of WordPress were amongst those drawn into the community. From very different backgrounds, their similarities were drawn out by software. Matt Mullenweg, from sun-blasted Houston used his blog to write about politics, economics, and technology, weaving through that his passions - jazz music and photography.  Mike Little, from rainy Stockport, wrote about blogging technology, the books that he reads, and his family. 

They both had different entries into computing: Matt was exposed to computers at an early age, through his father who was a computer programmer. Mike, twenty-two years older than Matt, had his first experience of computers at school, cut short when a teacher caught he and his friends smoking in the computer room. 

It was a shared passion, however, that drew them both deeper into programming. Mike was involved in the Manchester music scene in the 1980s, working at a record shop and handing out ‘zines for nightclub manager and record producer Tony Wilson. He lived with a local band called Belgian Bitch, and it was through them that computing came back into his life. Glam rock was the new thing, and the lead singer thought it would be cool to have stacks of televisions with graphics on either side of the stage. Mike borrowed a ZX Spectrum and used a couple of programs from  computing magazines: one of them bounced objects around the screen, the second created 3D text. He hacked until he got the words he wanted to bounce around a screen, but the plan finally fell flat when they couldn’t figure out how to output the program to multiple screens at the same time. Despite not being a total success, this incident further cemented his reputation for being the go-to guy for all things computing and music.

In Houston, Matt set up his own business while studying at the High School for the Performing and Visual Arts (HSVPA). While Mike’s music passion was post-punk, for Matt it was jazz. He built computers and websites for his music teachers, including his saxaphone teacher, [David Caceres](http://web.archive.org/web/20020329153221/http://davidcaceres.com/). He also used the internet to connect other music fans in the Houston area, setting up a [forum on David Caceres'](http://web.archive.org/web/20020202222327/http://davidcaceres.com/forum/) website. 

By the time they arrived at b2, both Mike and Matt had some experience with PHP. Mike had nearly twenty years of programming experience. After his first faltering step with the ZX Spectrum, he had fallen in love with it, and he arrived at b2 along a route that took him through Basic, 6502 Assembler, Pascal, and C. He learned PHP during the transition between PHP versions one and two. Matt had some experience of PHP when he installed b2, having used the phpbb forum software for setting up David Caceres’ website. 

This made b2 the perfect platform for publishing their content online. Matt did play around with some other platforms. He tried Movable Type but it didn’t have pingbacks and comments were in pop-ups as opposed to being inline. Also Movable Type was written in Perl with a DBD database, while Matt was more familiar with PHP. This meant that customizing Movable Type was difficult for him. 

For Mike, the other deciding factor was that b2 was licensed with the GPL. He had already contributed to open source projects, such as MySQL, was a follower of the author of the GPL, Richard Stallman, and was an advocate of free software.  

PHP & MySQL allowed Mike and Matt to scratch their own itch. This is a well-worn phrase in the open source world is "scratching your own itch." This means creating the tools that you need to use, whether that's a blogging platform, a text editor, or an operating system. By being both the developer of the software and its user, the developer knows whether the tools they create meet their real needs. The developers are the users. When they write code, they use it just as any user would. They know what works and what doesn't. Scratching an itch gives the developer a closer relationship with the software's users, it’s grass-roots development, bottom-up as opposed to top-down.

Mike and Matt weren’t the only people who had an itch to scratch. Jim Reverend, who had criticized b2, floated the [idea of inklog](http://revjim.net/2003/01/03/inklog-its-what-youve-always-wanted/), a weblogging platform built using PHP. Dougal Campbell, [dougal](http://profiles.wordpress.org/dougal), who would go on to be one of the first developers of WordPress, [posted about the idea of writing his own blogging software](http://dougal.gunters.org/blog/2002/11/12/software-development/). He wasn't a b2 user, though he had looked into using b2 for his blog. Finding it lacking, he proposed dBlog, a blogging platform that had the functionality that he needed.

—





Not everyone felt the need to write their own blogging platform from scratch. b2 was free and open source software, licensed under the GPL; anyone could fork the code and make use of it, provided their fork retained the license. It became clear that Michel was not coming back. No one was maintaining b2, no one was fixing security issues. The blogging software at the core of the growing community was no longer evolving. The web, and blogging, was moving forward, but b2 had lost its driving forces. In France, Francois Planque [forked b2 to create b2evolution](http://fplanque.net/Blog/devblog/2003/05/10/b2_evolution_new_features_summary). The lack of b2 development frustrated Francois and he wanted to continue to develop b2 for his own needs. 

In Cork, on the west coast of Ireland, Donncha Ó Caoimh, [donncha](http://profiles.wordpress.org/donncha/), forked b2 to create b2++, a multi-user blog platofrm. Donncha discovered b2 while searching for a platform to create a blog network for his Linux user group. He found b2 small, basic, and easy to modify. However, he made major modifications to [create blogs.linux.ie](http://web.archive.org/web/20030302025915/http://blogs.linux.ie/). b2++'s templating system used [Smarty](http://www.smarty.net/), which separated code and presentation, making it easier for users on the network to change their site's design. Donncha didn't consider b2++ as a fork of b2.  "A fork gives the impression that it was competing --- it wasn't competing because most of the things it did was add multi-user aspects to the project." b2 was a platform aimed at individual bloggers, but everything that Donncha did in b2++ created a better multi-user environment.

On his blog, [Matt](http://profiles.wordpress.org/matt) wrote a post called "[The Blogging Software Dilemma](http://ma.tt/2003/01/the-blogging-software-dilemma/)," in which he first mentions forking b2. This post led He wrote:

> b2/cafelog is GPL, which means that I could use the existing codebase to create a fork, integrating all the cool stuff that Michel would be working on right now if only he was around. The work would never be lost, as if I fell of the face of the planet a year from now, whatever code I made would be free to the world, and if someone else wanted to pick it up they could. I've decided that this (sic) the course of action I'd like to go in, now all I need is a name. What should it do? Well, it would be nice to have the flexibility of Movable Type, the parsing of Textpattern, the hackability of b2, and the ease of setup of Blogger. Someday, right?

The next day, from Stockport, UK, Mike Little, [mikelittle](http://profiles.wordpress.org/mikelittle), responded:

> If you're serious about forking b2 I would be interested in contributing. I'm sure there are one or two others in the community who would be too. Perhaps a post to the b2 forum, suggesting a fork would be a good starting point.

The post that started WordPress today gets a lot of traffic, but for more than a year it sat there with just one post and one comment, a marker of the very early days of the project, when for a few months just Matt and Mike worked on the code. Forking was a way to continue to use the software, and develop it for their own needs, to scratch their own itches. It was a moment when, in a small pocked of the internet, the right people connected. They may have been from completely different backgrounds, but a shared love on creating tools, playing with code, and publishing online, brought them together.

On April 1st, 2003, Matt created a [new branch of b2 on SourceForge](http://cafelog.cvs.sourceforge.net/viewvc/cafelog/), and, with the name coined by his friend Christine Tremoulet, called it WordPress.
