
## 42. The Community Summit

2012 saw the first en-masse get-together of the WordPress community. Up until then, contributors got together at WordCamps, and the core team had smaller, focused meetups, but there had never been a large community event focused on issues that face WordPress software development and the wider WordPress community. The event was invitation only. Community members could nominate themselves and others to receive an invite to the event and this list was reviewed by a team of 18 people who voted on who would be invited. The attendees came from across the WordPress community, including active contributors, bloggers, plugin and theme developers, and business owners. They came together for a few days on Tybee Island, Georgia, to talk about WordPress.

The main event, held at Tybee wedding chapel, was a one-day unconference, with a few informal days scheduled for afterwards for working on projects. In the morning attendees pitched their suggestions for discussions, discussion groups were formed around tables, and twice during the day the individual groups fed back their proposals for taking action. 

The subjects discussed were broad, covering the spectrum of development and community issues. Development specific topics discussed were the mobile apps, improving deployments, using WordPress as a framework, multisite, Javascript, the theme customizer, and automatic updates. There were also discussions about how to improve developer experience including better information for developers on UI practices. Broader community discussions were focused on the role of the WordPress Foundation, open sourcing WordCamp.org, the GPL, and women in the WordPress community. There were discussions about different teams such as UI, accessibility, and theme review, discussions about improving documentation. The summit attendees included people from all over the world and there was discussions about internationalization and global communities. Business owners discussed issues such as managed WordPress hosts and quality control in commercial plugins. And, finally, there were discussions about making it easier for both individuals and businesses to contribute to the project.

With so much discussed, and so many different ideas proposed, it was inevitable that some of the ideas proposed moved forwards, while others were dropped as there weren’t enough contributors to act on them. Concrete changes that came about from the discussions at the summit include:

- The better documentation of the theme review process to make the process more consistent and transparent
- The production of a documentation and Codex roadmap, with the eventual launch of developer.wordpress.org
- Language packs were included in core in WordPress 4.0
- Headers added to the P2 themes to tell contributors what to do to get involved in that area
- The publication of a make/events sub-team list
- Automatic updates 
- Individual plugin reviews on WordPress.org
- WordCamp.org base theme open sourced

As well as creating a space for contributors to discuss issues, many contributors met for the first time at the summit, and the in-person meeting helped to galvanize the community. 

It was around this time that a new team was formed: a review team for the plugin repository. Up until that time, much of the work on the plugin repository was done by Mark Riley, who was responsible for reviewing plugins. But the community felt that plugins should be subject to the same type of review as themes. The question was asked both on [community blogs](http://wptavern.com/is-a-plugin-validation-team-a-pipe-dream) and on [wp-hackers](http://lists.wordpress.org/pipermail/wp-hackers/2010-August/034146.html). The number of plugins had grown rapidly and some people had concerns about the quality of the code.	

Otto started to review the plugins too, and later Mika Epstein ([ipstenu](https://profiles.wordpress.org/ipstenu)) Pippin Williamson ([morduak](https://profiles.wordpress.org/mordauk) was added in 2012, when the plugin review team started to become a proper team in its own right, later Boone Gorges ([boonebgorges](https://profiles.wordpress.org/boonebgorge)) and Scott Riley ([coffee2code](http://profiles.wordpress.org/coffee2code)) were added to the team. The team faces its own challenges which are quite different to those faced by the theme review team. A theme is a specific grouping of template files with a defined structure. It has functions it needs to call, it needs to have a header, footer, and a sidebar. But a plugin can be anything at all so there’s no way to automate the review process. It is a lot of work. Yet the benefit of introducing this review process is that it has cleared out plugins with security holes, that were malicious or spam. A set of [guidelines has evolved](https://wordpress.org/plugins/about/guidelines/) that is intended to protect WordPress users. 

Again, a small group of contributors created a team that addressed a specific need within the project. This has continued ever since the summit, including teams formed to develop training programs for people who want to teach WordPress, moderators for WordPress.tv, and contributors who help to support meetups. The summit provided an opportunity for people to get together, to talk about their own interests, meet like-minded contributors and move projects forward. It was also a time for the community to be together as a community, to get to know one another socially, instead of just through the text medium that dominates communication online. 