## 42. The Spirit of the GPL

By early 2013, much of the GPL discussion had settled down. While not everyone liked the fact that the WordPress project would only support 100% GPL products, most people had accepted it. Many, however, were taken by surprise, by a sudden flare-up around not just the legalities of the GPL, but the “spirit” of the license. In a 2008 interview, Jeff Chandler asks Matt about the spirit of the GPL. Matt says that the spirit of the GPL is about user empowerment, about the four freedoms: to use, distribute, modify, and distribute modifications of the software. Software distributed with these four freedoms is in the spirit of the GPL. WordPress was created and distributed in this spirit, giving users full freedom with regard to the software. 

The Software Freedom Law Center's opinion -- with regards to WordPress themes, however -- gives developers a loophole, one that helps them achieve GPL compliance, but denies the same freedoms as WordPress. PHP in themes must be GPL, but the CSS, images, and JavaScript do not have to be GPL. This is how Thesis released with a split license -- the PHP was GPL, while the rest of the code and files were proprietary. This split license ensures that the theme is GPL compliant yet it isn't released under the same spirit as the GPL's driving user-freedom ethos.

The loophole may have kept theme sellers in line with the GPL, but WordPress.org didn't support that approach. [In a 2010 interview](http://wordpress.tv/2010/03/09/mullenweg-little-wordpress-interview/), Matt says “in the philosophy there are no loopholes: you’re either following the principles of it or you’re not, regardless of what the specific license of the language is." Theme sellers that sell their themes with a 100% GPL license are supported by WordPress. Those that aren’t don’t get any support or promotion on WordPress.org or on official resources. This is also one of the WordCamp guidelines, introduced in 2010; that WordCamps should promote WordPress’ philosophies. If a speaker, volunteer, or organizer is distributing a WordPress product it needs to be 100% GPL, i.e., the CSS, JavaScript, and other assets need to be GPL, just like the PHP.

In early 2013, ThemeForest, the theme marketplace run by Envato, came under scrutiny. Envato is the company behind a cluster of blogs and marketplaces that sell everything from WordPress themes and plugins, themes for other CMS, to photographs, videos, and illustrations. WordPress is just one aspect of their business, though a significant one, and ever-growing. Envato was one of the theme companies in 2009 who brought themselves into compliance with the GPL, by releasing their themes with two licenses: GPL for the PHP, and a proprietary license for the rest of the files and code.

ThemeForest has long been a popular choice for individual theme sellers. It offers exposure and access to a huge community of users. With the theme shop marketplace becoming increasingly saturated it became more and more difficult for new theme sellers to break through. Theme shops like StudioPress, WooThemes, and Elegant Themes dominate the market. ThemeForest offers everything a theme seller needs: hosting, sales tools, ecommerce, and a shop front. It provides a way for people to sell themes without having to do all of the associated set up work that can take up so much time. Besides, theme sellers make good money out of selling on ThemeForest. As early as December 2011, Envato [announced its first theme seller to make a million dollars in theme sales](http://notes.envato.com/milestones/kriesi-first-to-1000000-on-the-marketplaces/).

The matter came to a head in January 2013 when ThemeForest author Jake Caputo received an email from Andrea Middleton ([andreamiddleton](https://profiles.wordpress.org/andreamiddleton/)) at WordCamp Central. He was told that, as an author on ThemeForest, he was not allowed to participate at official WordPress events. Jake had already spoken at two WordCamps, had plans to speak at a third, and was helping to organize WordCamp Chicago.

The issue was over theme licensing and the WordCamp guidelines. WordCamps are official WordPress events that come with WordPress Foundation's seal of approval. [One of the stipulations](http://plan.wordcamp.org/become-an-organizer/representing-wordpress/) of being an organizer, volunteer, or speaker, is that you fully embrace the GPL. This goes beyond GPL compliance and means that you pass on all of WordPress' freedoms to your users. In short, that all of your WordPress-related products are 100% GPL. The guidelines state that you must:

> Embrace the WordPress license. If distributing WordPress-derivative works (themes, plugins, WP distros), any person or business should give their users the same freedoms that WordPress itself provides. Note: this is one step above simple compliance, which requires PHP code to be GPL/compatible but allows proprietary licenses for JavaScript, CSS, and images. 100% GPL or compatible is required for promotion at WordCamps when WordPress-derivative works are involved, the same guidelines we follow on WordPress.org.

For vendors on ThemeForest, the only option available to authors was to use two licenses, in which the CSS, JavaScript, and images were distributed with a proprietary license. For Jake to become 100% GPL, he would have to stop selling on ThemeForest and find a new outlet for his themes. This meant losing access to the more than two million members of ThemeForest and a significant portion of his income.

WordCamp Central's actions angered some community members; some thought it was unfair to ask theme sellers to give up their livelihood simply to speak at a WordCamp. Besides, couldn't theme author sellers simply not mention Envato or ThemeForest in their presentations? 

Others supported WordPress.org, seeing the move as consistent with their GPL stance. If a developer wanted to sell on ThemeForest it was their choice, just as it was the WordPress project's choice to support only 100% GPL products.

On both sides, people were frustrated for ThemeForest's authors. While the issue had little influence on the powers-that-be at WordPress or Envato, theme authors stuck in the middle were the ones to suffer. They had no choice about their license and moving off ThemeForest could jeopardize their livelihood in the short term.

The argument raged in the comments thread of Jake's blog, spiralling to other [WordPress community blogs](http://www.poststat.us/what-now-for-commercial-theme-authors/), and to the [ThemeForest forums](http://themeforest.net/forums/thread/wordpressorg-bans-themeforest-members-from-participating-in-official-wordcamp-gatherings/85648?page=2). Matt joined in the discussion on Jake's blog, [saying that](http://www.designcrumbs.com/automatically-blackballed#comment-430) if ThemeForest authors had a choice about licensing and could release their theme under the GPL, then "Envato would still be breaking the guideline, but Jake wouldn't, so it'd be fine for Jake to be involved with WordCamps."

Collis Ta'eed, CEO of Envato, [responded on WP Daily](http://torquemag.io/themeforest-wordcamps/), [^fn-1] outlining the reasons for Envato's licensing model. As a designer himself, Collis' main concern is protecting his designer's rights while ensuring that customers are able to use the resources they purchase.

As with so many disagreements in the WordPress community, it came down to a difference in emphasis. While the WordPress project emphasizes user freedoms, Envato emphasizes creators' rights. Both felt strongly that they had the moral imperative, and for either to back down would be to violate principles that underpinned their organization. The WordPress project places user freedoms over and above every thing else. If this meant excluding theme authors who sold on ThemeForest then so be it. 

Collis, on the other hand, wanted to make sure that his author’s rights were protected. His theme authors should feel confident that their themes were safe from piracy. He was also worried about having a GPL option for authors. He wrote "I worry that external pressures will force an increasing number of our authors to change their license choice, some happily, some not." Having just one (split) license meant that authors wouldn't be forced into that situation. Collis' professional background influenced his decision about licensing. He was a designer, and he felt that he had to protect other designers. The license at ThemeForest was one that made sense to him as a designer. 

From the project’s perspective, theme authors had a choice whether to sell their themes on ThemeForest, or sell their themes commensurate with the WordPress community's ethos (and thus speak at WordCamps). But [in a podcast on WP Candy](http://wpcandy.com/podcasts/035-with-special-guest-jake-caputo/), Jake talked about how he felt that he didn't have a choice about where to sell his themes. ThemeForest had become such an important part of his income that he would have to forfeit that income if he moved elsewhere. After the podcast, [Collis wrote a second post on WP Daily](http://torquemag.io/theme-clarity/), in which he said:

> I think I've been wrong in my stance. I would like to change that stance, and feel that ThemeForest should offer an option for authors, if they choose, to sell their themes with a GPL license covering the entirety of the theme. 

He announced in the post that he would open a survey for ThemeForest authors to see if they wanted a GPL opt-in option. "I felt pretty guilty that our authors were paying some sort of price for selling with us, that felt pretty wrong," [says Collis now](http://archive.wordpress.org/interviews/2014_04_11_Taeed.html#L86). [The results](http://notes.envato.com/news/survey-results-about-gpl-opt-in-choice/) demonstrated that an equal amount of verified authors would license their themes under the GPL as those who wouldn't, though 35% of sellers said that they didn't know what they would do. It also showed, however, that theme authors who wished to distribute their themes under the GPL were mostly unconcerned about piracy, while the majority of those who wished to stick to a split license or who didn't know were more concerned about piracy and the resale and redistribution of their products. On March 26th, Collis announced that theme authors [could now sell their themes on ThemeForest with a 100% GPL license](http://notes.envato.com/general/100-gpl-option-now-available-plus-woothemes-arrives/). Jake was [once again allowed to speak at WordCamps](http://www.designcrumbs.com/un-blackballed). 



[^Fn-1] WP Daily has since been acquired and its content moved to Torque magazine.

