The village of Cervione clings to the side of Mont de Castelli, one of the hundreds of mountains that stretch over the island of Corsica. The main part of the town rests in a natural amphitheatre, while houses are scattered down the mountainside towards the long stretch of beach. The blistered, stone buildings look eastwards, many perched at the edge of huge precipices giving the inhabitants a clear view to the green, rolling hills below. The mountains are a patchwork of sun-bleached rocks,  chestnut trees, and green fields interrupted by secluded hamlets and crumbling churches. Inside Cervione, the narrow streets are cobbled through a maze of alleys and arches. The dates of the buildings span centuries, shuttered windows flake with paint, and houses lean, holding each other up. At the centre, the bell tower of the Cathédrale St-Érasme overlooks the town, the mountains, and the blue Mediterranean that stretches toward the coast of Italy.

In 2000, in a small apartment above a bar across the square from the baroque Cathedral, Michel Valdrighi was writing a blog. The self-titled "only blogger in Corsica" worked on a dial-up AOL connection that disconnected every thirty minutes. When he tried to reconnect over the crowded network, it could take hours to get back online. He lived in the apartment with his cats, No Name and Gribouille, who perched on a windowsill that looked out over a high drop and [whose antics he captured on his blog](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2000/12/post1447/). Afraid that they would fall out, Michel closed the window, leaving the cats to jump upwards again and again, knocking themselves on the pane and falling back to the floor. Like many bloggers, Michel captured these minor incidentals in his life, using his blog to write about not only his cats, but his job, his colleagues, technology, and neopets. 

Michel was introduced to the internet while at University in 1999. His first month was spent hanging out in IRC chatrooms before he opened up Notepad and learned to make websites using HTML table based design. Making static sites quickly got boring   and a friend in an IRC chat room told him that he had discovered a tool which made it possible to automatically update his website. It even handled archives and, best of all, wasn’t a hosted service, which, at that time, were notorious for disappearing, along with all of their users’s data. Blogger seemed to be the answer. All it provided was two iframes, one at the top and one at the bottom, a text area and a submit button. But it meant he could get his content online quickly.

There were, however, issues with Blogger. For one, it didn’t have a built-in comment system. Michel signed up for two different commenting services, both of which disappeared along with all of the comments and discussions on his blog. Another issue with Blogger was its stability. As its popularity grew it became more and more unstable. People started to joke that it was "sometimes up."

Michel's first job was at a development shop in Corsica where he built websites for local businesses. In his spare time  he wrote on his blog and played around with web development. In December 2000, [Michel started to learn PHP](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2000/12/post1380/). 

PHP was created in 1995 by Danish programmer Rasmus Lerdorf. PHP originally stood for Personal Home Page, but its name was altered in 1997 during the rewriting of PHP3. It is now a recursive acronym - PHP: Hypertext Processor. PHP is a server side scripting language designed for web development. A script is embedded in the HTML source code, and the user's request to the website is carried out by the server. When a visitor goes to a website written in PHP or another server-side scripting language, all of the work is done on the server. The PHP is interpreted by a module on the server which generates the webpage. This is in contrast to client-side scripting languages, such as Javascript, for example, in which the scripts run in the web browser.

PHP takes input from a file and turns it into HTML. It’s often paired with a relational database such as MySQL. PHP combined with a database allows developers to create a dynamic website in which the PHP grabs information from the database, filters it, and then outputs it in the web browser. Michel played around with the language for a number of months, and five months in he created his first PHP and MySQL app, an online dictionary for preserving the Corsican language. He was helped out by [phpMyAdmin](http://www.phpmyadmin.net/home_page/index.php), a free and open source tool used for administering MySQL through a web browser. It provides a graphical user interface (GUI) through which the developer can perform various tasks such as modifying databases, tables, fields and rows. It makes it easy for people to administer a database without having to use a command line tool.

The experience taught Michel that he could use PHP to manipulate data; perhaps he could even build his own blogging script. The following month, in June 2001, [Michel started development of b2] (http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2001/06/post1958/), a piece of blogging software that he described as a "PHP+MySQL alternative to Blogger and Greymatter." In his blog post he wrote:
> Not much new ideas in it, but it will feature stuff like a built-in comment system, good users management (with complete profile etc), user-avatars (got piccies ?), multiple ways of archiving your blog (even post by post if you like to do a kind of journal).

> The installation will be easy, just edit a config file, upload everything and launch the install script. And there you go, but you’d like an admin control panel? It will be there, packed with options.

> Ooh la la.

The first thing he needed was a name. He wanted "blog" or "blogger" in the title. At the time, he was listening to "Song 2" by the British band Blur on repeat. He combined the two, making "blog2", then "blogger2", until he got to b2.

The PHP and MySQL combination was a good alternative to the way other contemporary blogging systems were set up. Movable Type, for example, rebuilt the page every time a comment was left or an edit was made to the page. This resulted in slow page low times. b2, on the other hand, was build to be an easy-to-use, speedy weblogging tool. "You type something and hit "blog this" and in the next second it's on your page(s)," [reads the sidebar of cafelog.com](http://cafelog.com/). It goes on, "Pages are generated dynamically from the MySQL database, so no clumsy 'rebuilding' is involved. It also means faster search/display capabilities, and the ability to serve your news in different 'templates' without any hassle." This was what Michel would go on to achieve with b2, and be part of the reason that Matt, Mike, and so many other bloggers would want to use the software. But before he got there, he was a novice developer, learning PHP and MySQL while building the precursor to one of the most widely-used blogging and CMS platforms in use today. He [recalls now](http://wordpress.tv/2012/02/27/les-origines-de-wordpress-la-naissance-de-b2cafelog/) that as a fledgling PHP coder he didn’t always do things the right way:
> When you look at WordPress's code and think 'Wow, that's weird, why did they do that this way?', well often that's because they kept doing things the way they were done in b2, and I sucked at PHP.

Michel, like Matt and Mike, started out by scratching his own itch, developing features that he needed for his own blog. He wanted to build a blogging tool, as opposed to a CMS, so he focused on blogging functionality. He felt that features not directly related to getting blog content on the web, such as media upload and photo galleries, weren’t a priority. The aim of b2 was to create a frictionless way for a person to blog. With this in mind, he started developing posting functionality and adding minor enhancements to make writing easier. [AutoBR](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=19&c=1), was added, for example, to add a <br/> tag every time a writer hits enter to create a new line. Once post editing was complete, Michel went on to [enable users to set their own timezone](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=22&c=1), and [started work on a templating system](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=24&c=1). Like Matt would after him, Michel was already concerned with making b2 as usable as possible for all users. "Some template routines are showing," [he wrote](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=30&c=1), "and that's a big thing to do to make templates customizable by Joe Newbie. I don't want to have these horrible things you can see on GreyMatter." Templating continued to be his major concern over the next couple of days. He got the post author name and time showing on the post, and later that day [completed his work on the initial templating system for b2](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=32&c=1). Over the next month he added an [options](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=39&c=1) page, [archives](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=45&c=1), and [comments](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=46&c=1). 

By the end of June, Michel was [ready to say goodbye to Blogger](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2001/06/post1909/), and move his blog to b2. He also set up a website for b2, originally a subdomain of his dayzero.org blog (later, his blog would be moved to zengun.org), before it was moved to cafelog.com. A few days after moving his blog, [he released the first version of b2](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=60&c=1). Soon after that, he [wrote on his personal blog about the second site running b2](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2001/07/post270/), the [personal weblog of a schoolboy called Russell](http://web.archive.org/web/20020718211541/http://russell.bustakartoon.com/). 

Cafelog.com was a gathering point for the nascent community. Michel let people register for the blog and once he trusted them they would have their privileges upped so they could post on the blog and even become admins themselves. Their first posts usually involved a "Woo hoo" and a [plug for their own website](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=21&c=1). These sorts of "[shameless plugs](http://www.cafelog.com/index.php?p=29&c=1)" were often the only posts that people actually made on the blog, a useful trick for getting some link back and traffic to their personal blog. 


Development didn’t always go smoothly. The first prominent user of b2 was Brigitte Eaton, who ran a site called [Eatonweb](http://portal.eatonweb.com/). Eatonweb is a hand-maintained list of blogs, which was a go-to place for discovering new blogs until the number of blogs exploded and hand maintaining a list became untenable. It was eventually superseded by the ubiquitous blogroll, and services like Technorati which started ranking blogs according to incoming links. Brigitte Eaton wrote a lot of content, publishing to her blog regularly. When she imported her blog into b2 she found that the more posts she added, the slower the blog got. At that time, Michel had no idea how to write code for retrieving months from the archives so he wrote some code to parse through every post on the blog, that would query whether the post had changed, and then display it. For blogs with large amounts of posts, this meant a huge workload on the server which would quickly slow down the website.

The first major code contribution to the project was [pingback functionality](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=490&c=1), from a developer called [Axis Thoreau](http://web.archive.org/web/20020921055340/http://mort.mine.nu:8080/b2/), who went by the handle Mort. Pingback is a linkback method which authors can use to request notifications when someone links to their website. An author writes a post on their blog that links to a post elsewhere. The original site sends a XML-RPC request and when the mentioned site receives the notification signal, it goes back to the original site to check for the link. If it exists then the pingback is recorded. A blogging system can then automatically publish a list of links in the comment section of the post, or wherever the developer wants to place it. 
Similar linkback functionality, called trackback, was included in Movable Type. Michel had included a version of this in b2. He [used the introduction](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2002/08/trackback-in-b2/) to trackback on the Movable Type website, and looked at the Perl code to see the data that was being passed to the trackback URL. Trackback is a ping sent from the original author’s site to a site they have written about, when a hyperlink is included. Unlike pingbacks, trackbacks are manual so the original author has to choose to send the trackback, and can edit the excerpt which is sent. Trackbacks are much more susceptible to spam than pingbacks. Spam pings are pings sent from spam blogs to get links on other websites. Whereas pingbacks ping back to the original site to verify that it is not spam, the same checks are not carried out by trackback. 

As the software expanded, the community followed suit. While b2 largely remained the pet project of Michel, there was a community of users and developers on the forums. They became a haven for people asking for help with the software. Many of the queries were around design as people sought for help to make their website look good. Developers helped each other out with hacks for b2. Some of the early WordPress developers had their first interactions on the b2 forums. Both Matt and Mike actively helped out other users, and Mike was known for helping other developers with their hacks.

All was going well until May 2002 when [Michel lost his job](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2002/05/jobless/). In the months following, he continued to keep up development on b2, but he [struggled with depression and health issues](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2002/08/back/), had his [electricity cut off](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2002/08/they-cut-my-arms/), [moved house](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2002/08/its-that-time-of-the-year-again/), and [struggled to find a job](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2002/10/untidy/). With so much going on his life, Michel eventually disappeared from the web. He [posted about spam in December 2002](http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2002/12/spam-the-blogosphere/) and didn’t post on his personal blog throughout 2004. 

The users of b2 were left without a lead developer. There was no one steering the project, making fixes, or adding new features. People were concerned about Michel - they liked him and were worried about what had happened to him. In March 2003, a [discussion thread was started on cafelog.com](http://cafelog.com/index.php?p=499&c=1), asking about Michel’s whereabouts. Michel’s sister, Senia, posted that he was well and that he was looking for a job. She promised to ask him to connect to IRC and MSN. The responses to Senia were mixed.

One commenter said:
> Please pass on to Michel that not only has he created a really nice piece of software, but he has also inadvertently built a community […] of people, a sort of commonwealth on the blogosphere. I don't know him the slightest bit, but I wish him well and hope that any soul searching or vision quest (or vision exodus?!) he has embarked on helps him find what he needs. Yet also allows him to tie up any loose ends that he leaves behind.

Others had concerns about their own projects:

> Anyone heard from Michel yet? His last post was 6 weeks ago. I want to install and promote b2 in two projects (one affiliated with a UN women's project).. but I am nervous about doing so if there will be no developer support available. I am sure he knows that b2 is including in the Fantastico auto-installer bundled with the cPanel virtual hosting tool. I want to write an blogging article for hosting clients. Michel? You going to be around?

In his absence, b2 was coming under criticism from the wider web development community. Michel's lack of coding experience showed, especially to experienced developers. One blogger, Jim Reverend, wrote a post titled ["Cafelog: A Look at Bad Code"](http://revjim.net/2002/12/21/cafelog-a-look-at-bad-code/). In it he bemoans the poor quality of code in publicly released software. He concentrates particularly on b2, which he says both lacks the features he needs in a blogging platform while using "poor coding practices." For Jim, b2 was lacking in a number of ways: it didn't cache calls to the database so when there was a new visit from a user the page would have to be loaded from the database and server, slowing the website down. He also complained about the lack of flexibility in the templating system and the lack of cruft-free URLS (known in WordPress lingo now as "pretty permalinks"). 

But his biggest issue, and an issue for other developers, were the poor coding practices. Michel's lack of PHP experience meant that he was he wrote inefficient code and used techniques that were counter-intuitive to a more experienced coder. Michel's code reflected a developer learning PHP. Rather than taking a modular approach to solve a logic problem, the code grew organically, written as Michel thought about it. Code wasn't so much a tool to solve a problem, but a tool to get the newest feature on the screen. This created multiple code interdependencies which could cause problems for developers new to the project. A line of code would change, and break something that appeared unrelated. For Jim, this type of "dirty code" was unforgivable; "What I do have a problem with," he writes, "is my inability to use his code (without extensive reading and rewriting) to implement my own features." A cornerstone of open source software is to write code that is extensible. If code is written in a stream-of-consciousness fashion and lacking in best practices, it can be difficult for other developers to extend.

Counterintuitively, it wasn't all bad, and in the context of WordPress it could even be seen as a benefit. In a follow-up article, [Jim Reverend concedes](http://revjim.net/2003/01/03/cafelog-a-few-more-thoughts/) that that there are some benefits to such poorly written code: 

> While programmers like myself start convulsing when we have to wade through such code, less experienced programmers actually like it, because it is easier for them to work with. Because the "template functions" are in the global namespace, they work anywhere. Because the data returned by the database is in a global variable, you don’t have to use any tricks to get at it. It makes extending, enhancing, and modifying the code easier for newbies.

Michel's inexperience meant that the code had a level of simplicity that made it easy for other novice developers to understand. Whereas a more experienced developer might write complex code, Michel often took the simplest route to solve a problem. "In a way it was beautiful because it was so simple," says developer Alex King, [alexkingorg](http://profiles.wordpress.org/alexkingorg/), "It wasn't elegant but it was very straightforward and very accessible. For someone who didn't have a lot of development experience coming in --- like me --- it was very comfortable understanding what was going on."

The article also highlights another important aspect - people liked using b2. It let them publish to their blog without any hassle, which was Michel's intention. "If you are a user of this product," writes Jim, "please don’t tell me about how cool it is, or about how well it works. If you read a site powered by this engine, please don’t tell me about how easy you find it to use." Which was the point: people did find it easy to use. To users it didn't matter what was going on under the hood. It may have had its problems but it was a frictionless way of getting content online. Where users went, developers followed; even better if those users were novice developers themselves, fumbling round at the edges of PHP, learning what they could do with code, what new functionality they could add to their website and share with other users. Even in these very early days, b2's development demonstrated the schism between developer-focused development and user-focused development. On the one hand a focus on logical, beautifully written code, on the other a focus on features that users wanted. 

In the midst of the discussion about b2's poor code, a number of developers started to talk about building their own blogging platform. Jim Reverend floated the [idea of inklog](http://revjim.net/2003/01/03/inklog-its-what-youve-always-wanted/), a web logging platform built using PHP. He proposed using the Model-view-controller (MVC) model of software architecture to build the platform. This eventually morphed into a [application framework](http://revjim.net/2004/01/22/inklog-what-is-it-part-2/), before morphing further into a [Rails project](http://revjim.net/2005/02/22/inklog-redux-on-rails/). Jim wasn't the only developer looking to create his own blogging platform. In November 2002, Dougal Campbell, [dougal](http://profiles.wordpress.org/dougal), who would go on to be one of the first developers of WordPress, [floated the idea of writing his own blogging software[(http://dougal.gunters.org/blog/2002/11/12/software-development/). He wasn't a b2 user, though he had looked into using b2 for his blog. Finding it lacking, he proposed dBlog. He wanted a number of key features in in his blogging software, including security, connectivity to other blogging platforms, and content separated from presentation Finally, Dougal wanted configurability --- dBlog would have a rich API enabling developers to extend it. Unlike Jim, but like many of the other people that talked  about writing their own blogging platform, Dougal never went ahead with it. After all there were platforms around that were just good enough, and developers could hack them into working according to their own needs.

It's not enough to create a piece of software, release it, and put it out there. It needs to be maintained - bugs need to be fixed, new features need to be added. The software needs to evolve along with the internet. b2 was a good platform, but without someone to fix bugs and add new features it was quickly becoming vapourware. And the software wasn't the only thing abandoned - the community was abandoned too. In the open source world, the community is as important as the software. The community is the garden in which the software grows and matures.  Community members submit patches, fix issues, support users, write documentation, and do all of the things that software needs in order to flourish. But every project needs a person, or group of people, to commit patches, decide on new features, and generally steer the project. When that person disappears without a trace, community members can play around the edges, helping out with support and making hacks, but, without someone to step up and take that person's place, the community quickly dissolves. People move to other projects, or start their own. After all, if the person who owns the project shows no commitment, how can commitment be expected from anyone else?





