In early 2000, a new wave of user-generated content was sweeping across the internet. The dot-com bubble had burst and many internet companies were in disarray. But while companies failed, individuals were looking for new ways to get their voices online. Pockets of blogging communities sprang up all over the internet, tight-knit connections were created between people who never met in real life but knew each other's thoughts through what they wrote online. Real names didn't matter - people created an online identity and went by a self-styled moniker.

The co-founders and early developers of WordPress all started out as bloggers themselves. They came to WordPress via blogging, not the other way round. Like every blogger, each of them had their own individual reason for going online to get their voices heard; to create a home on the internet, to have a sense of authorship, to share ideas and reach an audience, to get involved with topical debates, to post about what they read, they ate, the movies they watched, the things they did with their friends. To post about school or work or family, to post photographs of their cats.

Reading through the old posts, a topic that comes up again and again is the choice of blogging platform: the names Blogger, Movable Type, LiveJournal, Greymatter, and b2 are thrown around. Some bloggers talk about building their own platform, others look for ways to improve the platform that they've got. But where did that impetus come from? Not just to write, but to improve the tools one writes with, to get content online ever easier, ever faster, to share those tools with the world. 

A well-worn phrase in the open source world is "scratching your own itch." This means creating the tools that you need to use, whether that's a blogging platform, a text editor, or an operating system. By being both the developer of the software and its user, the developer is in the position to know whether the tools they create meet their real needs. The developers are the users. When they write the code, they use it just a any user would. They know what works, what doesn't. Scratching an itch gives the developer a closer relationship with all of the software's users, it is grass-roots development, bottom-up as opposed to top-down. It's been a feature throughout open source software development, and at the start of the century there were lots of bloggers feeling itchy. 

February 2002 and in Houston, Texas, Matt Mullenweg was home from school. He was in his bedroom, sat at his homemade PC, surrounded by posters of his favorite Jazz musicians. With nothing better to do, he got a copy of the Movable Type blogging platform, installed it on a web server and [published his first blog post] (http://ma.tt/2002/02/testing-new-system/). 

"I suppose it was just a matter of time before my egotist tendencies combined with my inherit geekiness to create some sort of blog. I’ve had an unhealthy amount of fun setting this up. This will be a nexus where I talk about and comment on things that interest me, like music, technology, politics, etc. etc."

The title of his blog post, _testing new system_, was like thousands of other first blog posts before him. A post to test out the new platform and to tell there world "here I am."

A few months later and nearly five thousand miles away, Mike Little was sat in the cellar that was his home office. The cellar of the house had been transformed; tanked, carpeted, and lined with his books and hundreds of CDs. Taking up most of his Ikea desk was a 17inch CRT monitor. He had spent his Sunday installing an open source blogging platform, b2. [His first post] (http://zed1.com/journalized/archives/2002/04/21/welcome/), not unlike Matt's, stated his blogging platform and his intent. "There will either be nothing here," he wrote, "or a collection of random thoughts and links. Nothing too exciting. But then again I'm not an exciting person."

These two inauspicious blog posts mark the beginning of not only two blogs, but a blogging platform; not just a blogging platform, but the most widely-used blogging platform and content management system in use today. In different parts of the world, with completely different platforms, two people caught the blogging bug and caught it bad. Not only did they want to publish their content online but soon after setting up their blogs they were looking for ways to scratch their own itch. They wanted to get their content online faster and more efficiently, create better tools for their websites and for sharing content, to refine the tools that they used, and to share those refinements with the rest of the world. 

Blogging, while not quite in its infancy, was still maturing. A few years prior to Matt and Mike's entry to the blogosphere, in 1998, there were just a handful of what could be called weblogs. Often, these were curated collections of links that the author would add snarky or sarcastic commentary to. They provided a filtering function, pre-surfing the web for readers who could browse through links on weblogs that they trusted. One of the earliest bloggers, [Justin Hall] (http://www.links.net/), [collected links] (http://www.links.net/www/index.html) to the darkest corners of the internet. In addition to sharing all of the weirdest things he could find on the internet, Hall was one of the first people to pour his personal life into his online diary, sharing everything of himself with the net, which culminated in a [breakdown video] (http://www.links.net/daze/05/01/14/dark_night_flick.html).

This transition from linklog to personal diary was noted in 2000, when Rebecca Blood wrote [an early history of blogging] (http://www.rebeccablood.net/essays/weblog_history.html). In her article, she talks about the differences between the traditional weblog as a curated collection of links, as opposed to the new form of blogging. Blogs transformed from “a list of links with commentary and personal asides to a website that is updated frequently, with new material posted at the top of the page.” This is the type of blog that we're most familiar with today. Blogging software publishes content with the most recent at the top of the page. When a visitor lands, they get to see the latest post. This original premise of self-publishing on the web has continued throughout the history of blogging from the earliest online diaries to weblogs to tumblogs and even to microblogging such as Twitter. We've become accustomed to the most recent content first, have been conditioned to identify the publication of personal thoughts when we see it.

Many of the first bloggers were those already involved with the web, software developers like Dave Winer, designers like Jeffrey Zeldman, and technologists like Anil Dash. This meant that much of the earliest blog content was about the web and technology, interspersed with more diffuse thoughts and commentary about the blogger's own life. Bloggers often had a tendency towards meta-commentary and would write about the tools [used to write their blogs] (http://scripting.com/1997/11/24.html) and the [improvements that they made to their sites] (http://dashes.com/anil/1999/08/pulldown-menus.html). While blogging had a steady growth during this period, the community was still seen as geeky and insular. Journalists spoke disparagingly of bloggers and rarely took their reporting seriously. 

In 2001, blogging started to really permeate the public consciousness. American political blogs became popular in the wake of the September 11th attacks on the World Trade Centre and Pentagon. Blogs such as [Instapundit] (http://pjmedia.com/instapundit/) and [The Daily Dish] (http://dish.andrewsullivan.com/) saw a massive surge in popularity. Andrew Sullivan, the blogger behind The Daily Dish [wrote about] (http://sullivanarchives.theatlantic.com/culture.php) how people didn't come to his blog just for news; "They were hungry for communication, for checking their gut against someone they had come to know, for emotional support and psychological bonding". This was one of the first indications of the power of blogging - it gave people a voice online, provided a platform where people could come together to grieve.  In his book _Say Everything: How Blogging Began, What It’s Becoming, and Why it Matters_, Scott Rosenburg talks of how, despite the bursting of the dot-com bubble, the final quarter of 2001 saw an increase in blogging. “Something strange and novel had landed on the doorstep,” Rosenburg writes in his introduction, “the latest monster baby from the Net. Newspapers and radio and cable news began to take note and tell people about it. That in turn sent more visitors to the bloggers’ sites, and inspired a whole new wave of bloggers to begin posting.” Since that time blogging, and later social media, has played a pivotal role in politics, public life, and even revolutions.

The evolution of blogging was mirrored in the tools that enabled bloggers to get their content online. Services like Geocities and Tripod enabled anyone to create a website, but these sites had little in common with the dynamic stream of content on a blog. The earliest blogs were created manually using HTML and FTP. Justin Hall, on his weblog, had a page titled [Publish Yo' Self] (http://www.links.net/webpub/) which claimed that "HTML is easy as hell!" and taught people how to write HTML and publish it online. However, this was still a barrier to entry and programmers sought for a way to make it easier. The dream was to create a tool that would let people write content and publish it to the web with one click. Dave Winer, whose popular [Scripting News] (http://scripting.com/) was one of the earliest blogs, set up UserLand Software which developed (Frontier NewsPage) [http://scripting.com/frontier/netScripting/newsPage.html], a tool that enabled people to create news-oriented websites like scripting news. 

However, not everyone wanted to recreate Scripting News and besides, if you weren't already familiar with the internet, setting up your own hosting and running the tool would still have been a complex task. In 1998, [Open Diary] (http://www.opendiary.com/) was launched, an online community where people could write their diary online and communicate with other diarist. This was followed by [LiveJournal] (http://www.livejournal.com/), and then [Pitas.com](http://www.pitas.com/), in 1999. In the same year, [Blogger] (http://blogger.com), was [launched](http://evhead.com/1999/08/we-just-launched-cool-new-tool-at-pyra.asp) by Pyra Labs. Blogger automated published a blog to a web server: the user would write their content, and Blogger uploaded the page to the server after each post. It is often credited with popularising blogging. The following year, Dave Winer released [Radio UserLand] (http://radio.userland.com/), a client side blogging tool, RSS aggregator, outline, and a scripting language. 

2001 saw the launch of Movable Type, the platform which would be one of WordPress' biggest competitors. Movable Type was developed by Ben and Mena Trott, originally for Mena's personal use. While Blogger was easy to use, it was limited in its functionality, so the Trotts set out to create something different for [Mena's blog] (http://www.dollarshort.org/). In 2001, they were both laid off from their jobs. With time on their hands they were able to plough time into refining their tool and making it ready to bring to the masses. In October, they launched Movable Type and it quickly became the most popular blogging platform, used by many of the major blogs at the time, including Instapundit, Wonkette, and Boing Boing. In many ways, Movable Type raised the bar for blogging platforms. It was not simply a publishing platform, but was a publishing platform that people wanted to use. Anil Dash is quoted in an [article in Salon] (http://www.salon.com/2004/08/09/six_apart/) as saying "The very first thing that caught my eye was that it was very elegant. I said 'I want my site to look like that.' It was elegant all the way through, and the features — really basic stuff, like I wanted comments and categories and titles on my posts. I mean that wasn’t a common thing then, you couldn’t put a title on your post. Really basic stuff like that, and they got all that together in one tool, in a way that worked."

Once bloggers were able to publish online using tools like Blogger and Movable Type, the next step was for the tools themselves to evolve. The tools needed to be better, communication and sharing needed to improve. Publishing content just wasn't enough. Blogrolls were an early example of this functionality. Blogrolls were lists of blogs that the blog author read. They would typically display them in their sidebar. It served two purposes: to display which blogging tribe that you belonged to, and to give "link love" to a blog that the author liked. 

Permalinks and Trackbacks were other early developments in blogging. _Permalink_ is a portmanteau of _permanent link_ - it points to the specific blog post in the archive. With the rise of blogging, web pages went from being static to dynamic. A blog entry would only be on the front page of the site for a short period of time. Permalinks enabled visitors to have a direct link to the article that they could use to return to. Trackbacks are a linkback method that was introduced by Six Apart in Movable Type. A trackback is a ping sent from a site that links to another. The site that receives the ping can publish the acknowledgement on their website. This was a way to facilitate communication between blogs. If a blogger had written about your article, they could send a trackback.

These changes and improvements were iterative steps towards bringing people together from totally different backgrounds, in different locations, and providing them with a virtual locale in which they could create, work together, and sometimes produce something unexpected. The creation of WordPress is one of those moments when, in a small pocket of the internet, the right people connected. They may have been from completely different backgrounds, but a shared love on creating tools, playing with code, and publishing online, brought them together. 

Matt was born in Houston, Texas on 11th January 1984. His parents Chuck and Kathe, already had one daughter, Charleen, who was ten years old whenever Matt was born. Matt's childhood is what you would expect for a kid growing up in sun-stricken Houston in the 1980s. He was a member of the little league team and a boy scout. His mother, Kathe, was a stay-at-home mom who dedicated her time to her children. Matt did well at school, eventually joining the High School for the Performing and Visual Arts where he studied saxophone. The only major blight on his childhood was a series of illnesses affecting his sinus. He had crippling headaches that would cause him to miss school. He was troubled by light and dark sounds. Kathe recalls now how she would sit with him in a darkened room, holding a cloth to his head. In high school he had a sinus CAT scan which revealed an infection. There were growths of dead bone and tissue that were millimeters away from piercing Matt's brain. He had dozens on surgeries to clear up the infection. With his illness cleared up, Matt continued to do well at school and went on to college to study economics.

The content on his blog reflects many of his early interests. As promised in his first post, he wrote about politics, economics, and technology. Over time the balance of his focus shifts; while at University he writes about philosophy, then he shifts more and more towards technology, entries deal with web standards, coding, and ongoing debates in the technology world.  Interspersed within that are personal posts about the health of his cat, his nights out with friends, and, for a short period of time, a [large amount of puns] (http://ma.tt/2002/10/punaday-10/). Woven into the mix are Matt’s early passions - jazz music and photography. 

Twenty-two years earlier, and nearly five thousand miles away, Mike was born in Manchester, UK, in 1962 to a Nigerian father and an English mother. In 1960s Britain, mixed-race relationships were still taboo, and within a few months of his birth Mike was fostered by a family in Stockport. This didn’t stop his biological parents from wanting to be together - two years later they had a second child, Michelle, who was eventually fostered by the same family. Mike has no recollection or knowledge of his biological parents. All he recalls today is an incident as a child when he was taken to court and asked whether he was happy in Stockport with his foster parents. A few months later he was adopted by his foster parents. It wasn’t until many years later that he discovered that his biological father had returned and tried to take him back to Nigeria.

Mike was brought up in the home of his foster parents and their daughters, who were ten years older than him. His father worked in a factory and his mother was a doctor’s receptionist. The family lived rent-free in the house over the doctor’s surgery. Despite always doing well at school, when he reached sixth form, Mike lost interest in his academic studies and dropped out of school. His first job was at at a communical TV aerial installation company where he was responsible for wiring electronics, but his growing passion was music. It is in music and computing where Matt and Mike, despite their different backgrounds, start to share similarities. For both of them, music was one of the elements that led to their work online. Both had earlier experience with computers, but it was via the catalyst of music that propelled them further along that path.
  
Matt's interest in computers started when he was a kid. His father, Chuck, was a computer programmer and there were always computers in the house. His first experience of computing was a game on the Atari - Winnie the Pooh and the Hundred Acre Wood. He graduated from these to role-playing games such as Ultima online. His experience of computers developed as he grew up. On _take your son to work day_, and on occasional Saturdays, Chuck took Matt to work with him where he was able to play around on computers all day. He started learning to take computers apart and back together.

While he was at high school he started to make money from computers. While studying at HSVPA, he got interested in building computers and websites. Once of his early businesses was building computers for his saxaphone teacher, David Caceres and other musicians around Houston. He graduate from building computers to building website. Under the business name [SWC] (http://web.archive.org/web/20020401182611/http://www.swcdesign.com/) he built websites for local companies, including [ his teacher] (http://web.archive.org/web/20020329153221/http://davidcaceres.com/). While at school he also used the internet to connect with other music fans in the Houston area. He set up a [forum on David Caceres'] (http://web.archive.org/web/20020202222327/http://davidcaceres.com/forum/) website. To ask questions and learn more about building websites, he signed up for SitePoint, where he was active on the forums under the username [allusion] (http://www.sitepoint.com/forums/member.php?12622-allusion), a username that would stay with him through the first few years of the WordPress.org forums.

Mike was also led to computing via music, though it was music of a very different kind. His very first exposure, however, to computers did not happen so well. While in sixth form at school, he had a free period each week during which he could choose what to do. He and some friends decided to go to the local college and try programming. At that point there wasn’t even a screen - the boys typed on a keyboard and it came out on printed paper at the back end. One of Mike's friends decided to use his time on the computer to smoke - the boys were caught, the teacher furious that they had smoked around so much paper, and this brought to a close Mike's very first foray into programming.

He returned to it, however, in 1982. The music scene in Manchester and Stockport in the late 1970s and early 1980s was thriving.  An influential performance by The Sex Pistols at the Lesser Free Trade Hall fuelled the growth of Manchester’s music scene, with people like Peter Hook and Bernard Sumner (Joy Division), Morrissey (The Smiths), and Tony Wilson (Factory Records) in the audience. It was in this atmosphere of punk, post-punk, and new wave, that Mike gave up his aerial job and started working in a record shop. At the centre of the music scene, he was able to get tickets to gigs, seeing bands such as Joy Division and Cabaret Voltaire, and handed out ‘zines for don of the Manchester music scene, Tony Wilson.

During that period, Mike lived with a local band called Belgian Bitch, and it was through them that computing came back into his life. Glam rock was the new thing, and the lead singer thought it would be cool to have stacks of televisions with graphics on either side of the stage. Mike borrowed a ZX Spectrum and made use of a couple of programs he’d gotten from some computing magazines: one of them bounced objects around the screen, the second could create 3D text. He hacked until he could get whatever words he wanted to bounce around a screen, but the plan finally fell flat when they couldn’t figure out how to output the program to multiple screens at the same time. Despite not being a total success, this incident further cemented his reputation for being the go-to guy for all things computing and music.

Mike's first programming experience was twenty years before he met Matt. In the interim years Mike, honed his programming stills. The music scene in Manchester eventually went on a long hiatus but Mike continued to learn to program. He moved onto an 8bit Atari, and started programming using Emacs on a 16bit Atari ST. It was when he was running a video rental shop that he finally bought a PC. Bought for running the shop, it was a 640k monochrome computer (also known as a green screen) with a 20mb hard drive, that cost £3,000. Mike got himself a copy of Turbo Pascal on some 5.25 inch floppies, installed it and taught himself programming in earnest.

He fell in love with it, enjoying the challenges and problem solving. He learned Basic, 6502 Assembler, Pascal and Object-Oriented Pascal, and then learned C on production software once he started coding professionally. He learned PHP, the language which WordPress would be written in, during the transition between PHP versions 1 and two. PHP often comes in for criticism, but for Mike, much of it is unwarranted. “I know a lot of languages now,” he says “They're all just syntax for me. Any modern language - so anything in the last 20 years - allows you to write good code. Many of them allow you to write really crap code as well. People who complain about PHP as if it forces you to write bad code either don't understand that beginners will always write bad code no matter what language they use or themselves haven't got the discipline to write good code.”

With his experience of PHP, b2 was the natural platform for Mike to start blogging with. For one, it was written in PHP with a MySQL database. For another, it was licensed under the GNU General Public License, a free software license that encouraged the distribution and hacking of software. Mike had already contributed to open source projects, such as MySQL, was a follower of the author of the GPL, Richard Stallman, and was an advocate of free software. The other open source platform that was available at that time, [Greymatter] (http://www.greymatterforums.com/), was written in Perl and wasn't easy to install. For Matt, too, a platform written PHP made more sense than using the Perl-based Movable Type - Matt had already had experience hacking PHP when working on the forums for David Caceres. It wasn't long, therefore, after setting up his blog that he shifted platforms from Movable Type.

b2 was the platform that connected Matt and Mike. It was through publishing hacks and tips on their blogs, and encountering each other on the support forums, that they had their first interactions. And it is in b2 that we can find the origins of WordPress, before it was WordPress, and before Matt or Mike had considered writing their own blogging software. In June 2001, before either of them had written their first blog post, a developer in Corsica started [development of his own blogging platform] (http://zengun.org/weblog/archives/2001/06/post1958/). He touted it as a "PHP+MySQL alternative to Blogger and Greymatter." It's in that post this WordPress' history truly begins, 18 months before any talk of forks, before anyone had thought that combining the words "Word" and "Press" was a suitable name for a blogging platform. It's not in Stockport or Houston that WordPress' roots entirely lie, but the real beginning is miles away on the French island of Corsica.