# Chapter Four

## On forking WordPress, forks in general, early WordPress, and the community

The General Public License (GPL) is the license with which WordPress is distributed. There are few things in WordPress' history that have caused more controversy. Why do people get so fired up about a license? After all, we encounter licenses often in our day-to-day lives and often we simply ignore them. And no doubt many users pay little attention to the licenses that comes bundled with WordPress, but it's still a cornerstone of WordPress' history and development. Every year or two an argument flares up around the GPL, usually around a misunderstanding of its basic premise. But the GPL became significant long before WordPress was even conceived and continues to be	a key part of the free software community. In  2013, the [GPL remains the most popular free software license](http://osrc.blackducksoftware.com/data/licenses/) . But where did it come from, why is it so important to WordPress, and why does it cause so much controversy? This section will look in detail at, what Matt Mullenweg calls, WordPress' "bill of rights", asking all of these questions, and looking at some of the times when the GPL had a big impact on WordPress.

The MIT AI Labs of the 1970s provided the grounds from which the free software movement and the GPL would eventually appear. There a community of hackers shared software with one another. It was a given, an unacknowledged part of the fabric of that culture. It seemed so obvious that there was no need to say that software should be free. It was self-evident that sharing software with your friends meant that they could work on it, or "hack on it", and create something better, find bugs, or help with the development. This MIT bubble was home to some of the greatest minds in computing. The hacker culture and its eventual demise is outlined in Stephen Levy's book [Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hackers:_Heroes_of_the_Computer_Revolution). Levy outlines its core principles as freedom of information, the promotion of decentralisation, that access to computers should be unlimited, hackers should be judged on their hacking online and on nothing else, that art and beauty can be created on a computer, and that computers can change your life for the better.

One of the hackers to join the lab towards the end of this golden age of hacking was Richard Stallman. Stallman was doing a physics degree at Harvard while hacking at the MIT Labs. The young Stallman absorbed the hacker ethic entirely, and would go on to found the free software foundation and write the GPL, but before he got there he had to witness the destruction of hacker culture at his beloved AI Labs.

The decline of the hacker culture at MIT happened around the development of a machine for running LISP, a powerful computing language originally specified in 1958. Two companies sprang up around the machine: LISP Machine Incorporated (LMI), set up according to the hacker ethic by one of the chief developers of the machine, and Symbolics, a capital-backed company. In the drama that followed, Stallman watched his friends hired away from the MIT labs, many of them taking jobs at Symbolics. Some were lured by the promise of money and stability, others had to support growing families. Responsibilities took precedence to hacking on code. The heyday of hacker culture was becoming a memory, and Richard Stallman was one of the last left clinging on, watching a bitter schism grow as more and more people left.

Stallman was deeply affected by this. Levy describes how Stallman "would tell strangers he met that his wife had died, and it would not be until later in the conversation that the stranger would realise that this thin, plaintive youngster was talking about an institution rather than a tragically lost bride."

Without the hackers around, the labs started to fall into disrepair - a system would break and no one would be able to fix it. Non-hackers turned to commercial systems, an anathema to Stallman. The nail was further hammered into the coffin when Symbolics, the company that shared the LISP license with MIT and LMI, decided that its code would be proprietary. Sharing of software would not be allowed. 

After a period dedicated to reverse engineering all of Symbolics' new features and bug fixes and presenting them to LMI, Stallman finally left MIT. Disenchanted and disappointed with the decline of the hacker society he loved, he set out to create an operating system based on hacker ethics. It would be based on the proprietary operating system UNIX, but anyone would be able to use it and it would be freely available. In reaction to the Symbolics debacle, Stallman wanted to create something that could not become the provision of corporations who wished to prevent people from doing what they wanted with the software. He called the operating system GNU (a recursive acronym - GNU's Not Unix), and at [its heart was the belief that](http://www.gnu.org/gnu/thegnuproject.html) "computer users should be free to modify programs to fit their needs, and free to share software, because helping each other is the basis of society."

While this was undoubtedly a painful period for Stallman, it had a far-reaching impact. It forced Stallman to take the hacker ethic from where it was holed up at MIT, to the rest of the world. This escalated the growth of free software. He set up the Free Software Foundation and published the [GNU Manifesto](http://www.gnu.org/gnu/manifesto.html), one of the founding documents of the free software movement. This document outlined the reasons for creating GNU, stating that "the Golden Rule requires that if I like a program I must share it with other people who like it." It also had the germinal form of the notion of copyleft that would be central to the GPL:

> GNU is not in the public domain. Everyone will be permitted to modify and redistribute GNU, but no distributor will be allowed to restrict its further redistribution. That is to say, proprietary modifications will not be allowed. I want to make sure that all versions of GNU remain free.

While Stallman hadn't yet put together the license for GNU, he was already thinking about the conditions under which it would be distributed. As well as containing these early indications about distribution, the GNU Manifesto is a call for other programmers to get involved with developing the system. It outlines the way that programmers can help, through everything from software tasks to bug fixes to writing manuals and documentation. Stallman also asked for donations of machines that could be used for developing the system.

Stallman worked for years on GNU and by the 1990s had completed many of the different components such as libraries, compilers, a text editor and a Unix shell, but the system was missing a kernel. The kernel is a fundamental part of a computer, managing input/output requests from software and translating them into data processing instructions. Without a kernel, GNU was still reliant on UNIX for that functionality. The nature of free software created conditions in which a working kernel appeared thousands of miles from Stallman and MIT. In Finland, a University student called Linus Torvalds did the final work that allowed all of the parts of GNU to be brought together - he wrote a kernel called Linux which spawned the GNU/Linux operating system.

Long before this happened, however, Stallman was thinking about licensing. Elements of GNU, such as Emacs, the debugger, and the compiler, had their own individual license. The licenses were similar to the GPL, but incompatible with one another as each was so specific to the piece of software. In 1989, Stallman wrote the first version of the GPL. It reflected the terms of distribution that Stallman had outlined in the GNU Manifesto, as well as preserving the core values of the hacker ethic.

The GPL protects four freedoms that constitute "free software." It's important to note that the word "free" in this context does not apply to price; it refers to freedom, which is the underlying ethos that drives the Free Software Foundation. This choice of the word "free" in this context has dogged the FSF throughout its life. The uninitiated often think that "free" refers to cost and the FSF often has to qualify it with the statement "free as in freedom, not as in beer". 

[Free software protects four essential freedoms](http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html):

- 0 The freedom to run the program, for any purpose.
- 1 The freedom to study how the program works, and change it so it does your computing as you wish.
- 2 The freedom to redistribute copies so you can help your neighbour
- 3 The freedom to distribute copies of your modified versions to others. 

These can be summarised as "the users have the freedom to run, copy, distribute, study, change and improve the software." The freedoms are protected for all users of the work. 

The GPL employs what Stallman calls "copyleft", which subverts the normal use of copyright laws to protect the terms under which the work can be distributed and redistributed. It's a method of making a work free and of requiring that all extended and modified versions of the work are free as well. In this way, the copyright holder can ensure that their work does not end up being part of a proprietary model.

Copyleft works in the following way:
1. The copyright holder asserts that they hold the copyright to the work
2. To this is added the terms of distribution. This says that anyone can use, modify, and redistribute the work, provided they pass the same freedom on to everyone else.

If a programmer wants to use a copylefted work in his or her own software, then that new work must provide the same freedoms as the original work. Copyright, which is so often use to inhibit freedom is turned on its head. It is used against itself, or, as [Stallman puts it](http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/) "we use copyright to guarantee their freedom." A copyleft license doesn't abandon copyright (i.e. by simply putting a work in the public domain), it asserts it and uses it.

Why is software becoming part of a proprietary model a problem? In the case of Stallman, it's clear why he would object. The actions of Symbolics, who took the free software created by MIT and subsequently made its own code proprietary, had a damaging effect on the culture of software sharing that at MIT. Stallman had been a direct casualty of these actions, watching the place that he loved fall apart. It is understandable that he would want to protect the GNU operating system from becoming assimilated into organisations such as Symbolics.

But why is it important for everyone else? Not everyone experienced the murder of their "wife" at the hands of a corporation. What difference does it make to the rest of us?

The GPL is often described as a viral license. This is because any code that is integrated with GPL code automatically adopts the license. The GPL spreads. For free software proponents this is important. It means that the body of work that constitutes the commons is self-sustainable and self-perpetuating, thus preserving freedom. Critics, however, claim that this has a negative effect on the commercial uptake of free software. Steve Ballmer, CEO of Microsoft, [described Linux as](http://web.archive.org/web/20010615205548/http://suntimes.com/output/tech/cst-fin-micro01.html) "a cancer that attaches itself in an intellectual property sense to everything it touches."

It's not surprising that the CEO of Microsoft would have such a scathing view of Linux, but there are those in the free software and open source software world who are equally critical. In contrast to copyleft licenses is a family of [permissive free software licenses](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Permissive_free_software_license). These licenses have minimal restrictions about how the software can be distributed.  

The BSD license, for example, lets someone take free code and put it within a non-free program. The difference is one of emphasis. A permissive license emphasises developer freedom, i.e. the developer is free to do what they want with the software. From the perspective of those who support permissive licenses, these are more free than a copyleft which carries restrictions about how the code can be used. A copyleft advocate, however, would say that the developer has taken advantage of the freedom offered to him or her, but doesn't not pass those freedoms on to someone else. They take from the commons without participating in it, they make use of freedom but deny it to others. A copyleft license, on the other hand, emphasises user freedom, i.e. the software must remain free for all users, all of the time. This adds to the widening pool of knowledge in a commons that is able to protect itself and continue the spread of that knowledge. 

The rise of the internet has altered the significance of free software, in terms of its development model, the flow of information, in terms of education and knowledge, and of the social. Along with in internet's growth, the significance and influence of free software has grown and changed. 

For one thing, the internet enables a non-traditional development model, one that follows the hacker ethic of decentralisation. Eben Moglen, Professor of Law at Columbia Law School, and Director-Counsel and Chairman of the Software Freedom Law Center, [points out that](http://moglen.law.columbia.edu/publications/lu-01.html) "large numbers of programmers can collaborate easily on enormous projects without having to be locked into a hierarchical organization. Everyone can participate in finding and fixing bugs and everyone can readily incorporate all the fixes, so the quality of free software can be much higher than that of programs produced by a limited number of developers and testers inside a commercial proprietary manufacturer." Software is an incremental intellectual product. It is refined in response to the needs of the users and developers. When all of these people are networked it creates a rapid feedback loop in which software can be improved iteratively. This is fertile ground for free software, which is by its nature collaborative. Free software projects have sprung up all over the world and developers can collaborate with each other no matter where they are. All that is needed is an internet connection and an interest in a project.

The next way that free software is significant for the internet is in terms of the flow of information. Information can flow freely across the internet. [Moglen suggests](http://moglen.law.columbia.edu/publications/lu-01.html) that the Internet is a collection of pipes and switches, with information flowing along the pipes, controlled by the switches. Proprietary software controls the flow of information along the pipes. He gives the example of Windows Media Player, which won't let users save streaming video or audio on the hard drive. Proprietary code regulates information and therefore behaviour; it controls the switches. Free software, on the other hand, leaves control in the hands of the user; the user flips the switches however he or she chooses. 

Free software upholds the right to share information. Technological barriers to distributing one's own work have been removed. In the past, creators were reliant upon middlemen to distribute their work. For example, an author would write a book but would need a publishing company to take on the distribution, and a manufacturer would be needed to create physical copies of the book. The internet eliminates the need for middle men. The creator can distribute their own work freely. And it doesn't simply benefit creators in this way, there is also a huge benefit to consumers of information. In the past access to information could be restricted due to cost (information can be expensive) or scarcity (some books have a short print run and are only available in a few libraries). The internet allows all works to be distributed at equal (usually no or minimal) cost to everybody. Free software preserves this free flow of information, while proprietary software attempts to restrict it.

Circumstances in which information can flow freely are of immense benefit to education. Anyone can look at free software code and learn from it, anyone can read the documentation. One can go from knowing nothing to being an expert using material that is universally available at no cost. The GPL ensures that this network of free education, knowledge, and software spreads. The license is transmitted from one piece of code to another, spreading the network further and further. This promotes a principle of non-exclusion; everyone is equal and has equal access to information. 

The final way that free software has significance, and this is increasingly the case, is in the social that is constituted by cyberspace. Prior to the internet, computers were an important part of life but they didn't constitute social spaces of interaction. An operating system might determine the conditions under which one carries out work (word processing, image editing, databases), develop other software, or even play games, but it had little to do with person-to-person interactions. Along came Usenet and bulletin boards, then email, and finally, with the introduction of HTTP and HTML, the World Wide Web. Communities formed within virtual spaces. These spaces were built by coders, and those coders choices determined the conditions under which these communities were built and evolved. 

Code creates the fabric of a virtual space which a person interacts with. Or, as Laurence Lessig [puts it](http://www.codev2.cc/), the Net is "an architecture that made possible a certain kind of life." With the rise of the widespread use of the internet came the growth of a new type of life. From Usenet to the rise of blogging to social media, people have become increasingly embedded in virtual spaces. Communities form and real social interactions take place. 

Whoever creates the architecture determines the shape of this "certain kind of life". This life has its own reality that is increasingly no less real than the life we experience offline, however different its form. But while the most basic boundaries of our offline lives are created by pre-given laws of nature, the boundaries of cyberspace are created by the code that is written. Nothing is pre-given or disinterested. Decisions are made about how reality is constructed and what behaviours ought to take place. The decisions that are made and the behaviour that is engendered is dependent upon the person or persons making them. Reality can be very different dependent on whether those at stake are shareholders with an interest in making money, institutions that want varying levels of control over their members, individuals in the thrall of start-up culture, or members of a free software community. 

Think, for example, of the ubiquitousness of Facebook, of the reality which has been created and is participated in all over the world. Social interactions here are based around sharing content from the internet, updating people as to your status, sharing photographs and media, and the other types of interactions that the people who have architected Facebook determine. These behaviours spill over into the rest of our world, from the real-world use of "Like" to indicate that you like something (even if it's not on Facebook), to groups who organise parties and events solely on Facebook to the exclusion of people who aren't using the platform. The reality of Facebook has been manufactured and that reality seeps everywhere. 

This is what gives free software its new significance. Should the reality of cyberspace be constructed by bodies with a vested interest in moderating and controlling behaviour (be they corporations, individuals, or governments) or do we want spaces constructed under conditions of openness and community? There is  undoubtedly a place for both, but in the absence of free software we would be giving up our own ability to determine the conditions under which our social spaces are created. 

Anyone can get involved in a free software project, which means that anyone can have an impact on the spaces that we create. This isn't simply an area for coders. The WordPress project, for example, is a powerful example of what can happen when non-coders are integrated tightly into the project. This empowers people of all backgrounds to architect the internet. One may not be able to write code, but one can point out issues in user experience or interface, one can have influence on the direction of a project. This has been to WordPress' strength throughout its history. Free software gives us the ability to create our reality, rather than simply entering into a reality that is given. The GPL ensures that this freedom is available to everyone.

--- 

The rest of this section will look at the impact the GPL has had on WordPress and its community of developers and users, but before we get there, first let's look at how the GPL actually became WordPress' license. It was neither Matt Mullenweg nor Mike Little who made the decision to release WordPress with the GPL, but it was the decision of Michel Valdrighi, and it seems to have been a decision made under much frustration.

When deciding what to license b2 under, Michel spent a lot of time going back and forth. The free software movement was relatively young and many large projects had their own license terms (such as Apache, PHP, X.Org). Michel felt that until he had settled on a license he would just let it be covered under regular copyright. Michel would then be able to determine what other people could do with his code. 

[this section needs updated when cafelog.com is fixed]

On the b2 blog, it's possible to follow the progress of the appearance of the GPL in b2. In August 2001, Michel made a brief statement on cafelog.com, telling people that they could use his code provided he was given credit for it, stating explicitly that "b2 isn't released under the GPL yet." People were starting to take notice of b2 and within a few months they were passing it off as their own. In October, a Norwegian agency claimed to own the copyright to b2 and Michel was forced to contact the Norwegian copyright agency. In the discussion around this incident, Michel made a statement that came as close to a license as he'd got so far:

> You can use b2 for free, even if your site is of commercial nature. You're welcomed to buy me items from my Amazon.com wishlist if you're going to make much money from your b2-powered site or if you just like b2.

> You can edit b2's source code.

> You can re-distribute a modified or original version of b2. In no way your modifications make you author or co-author of the modified version, I'll remain b2's sole author and copyright holder.

> Any help is welcomed. Feel free to submit fixes and enhancements, they might get in b2's code and your name or email address will be there as credit in the source code.

> I guess this makes a b2 license for now.

b2 continued to be released under this slapdash license for a few months but he soon realised that b2 needed an official license so he started looking in earnest. It was important to Michel that b2 remain free, even if he stopped working on the project himself, or if someone else took the code and used it for their own project, so he rejected the MIT/BSD licenses and their derivatives. The PHP license was a BSD derivative which he also rejected because it had clauses saying that redistribution had to include an acknowledgement of the original project. He recalls now that "at the end of that elimination process, GPL remained. It helped that there were already some projects using it, as I didn't want the code to end up abandoned and forgotten because of the choice of an exotic license." With his own eventual disappearance from the project, Michel's choice of license was prescient. With a GPL license, b2 could be forked, modified, and redistributed, which is exactly what Mike and Matt did.

If you open the open the license.txt file that comes bundled with WordPress it states the following notices:

> b2 is (c) 2001, 2002 Michel Valdrighi - m@tidakada.com -
  http://tidakada.com

> Wherever third party code has been used, credit has been given in the code's
  comments.

> b2 is released under the GPL

> and

> WordPress - Web publishing software

> Copyright 2003-2010 by the contributors

> WordPress is released under the GPL

It's the perfect example of how a copyleft license works. Michel asserted his original copyright on b2 and then distributed it under the GPL, which said that it anyone was free to distribute and modify it, provided they pass those freedoms on. This meant that when it was originally forked, the developers had no choice but to license WordPress under the GPL. Michel's original intention to preserve b2's freedom worked.

The GPL in WordPress continues to be protected by the fact of the sheer number of contributors. The WordPress codebase is created by thousands of people all over the world. Each person who writes code for WordPress retains their copyright but agrees to license the code under the GPL. This makes it virtually impossible for the creators of WordPress to ever changes the license. To do so, they would need to contact every single person who had ever contributed code to WordPress and ask them to agree to the change. This would include everyone from the most prolific contributors to those who contributed just one patch, from todays lead developers to Matt and Mike, and as far back as Michel. This means that WordPress will always remain free, its rules cannot change. The same cannot be said for software in which an individual or a company own the copyright. At any point, the license can be changed. And this, in 2004, was exactly what happened with one of the biggest platforms around.



