

## 31. Themes are GPL too

As the project transformed, so did the wider economy around WordPress. When Brian Gardner released the Revolution theme under the GPL in late 2008, theme developers watched with curiosity to see how that would influence his business. It seemed counterintuitive to give a product away and run a business. What better way to test the waters than to see how someone else’s GPL experiment would play out? 

As theme authors watched and waited, commercial theme licensing came to a head. Just before Christmas 2008, [200 themes were pulled from the WordPress theme repository](https://web.archive.org/web/20090212220653/http://spectacu.la/wordpressorg-pull-200-gpl-themes). Premium theme developers and [the wider community](https://web.archive.org/web/20090315162659/http://www.jeffro2pt0.com/why-were-200-wordpress-themes-removed) were annoyed. What was the problem with theme authors selling themes? The themes hosted on the theme directory were free and complied with the GPL. As so often in the past, people conflated the actions of WordPress.org with Automattic and the company came under fire. Some perceived theme removal as a sign that Automattic didn't want anyone making money. 

The theme sellers' rhetoric may have been exaggerated, but theme sellers were genuinely unhappy. Their themes were pulled without warning. Many theme sellers saw their free theme releases as a way of supporting the free software community, and spent considerable time ensuring that they met the theme repository's standards. They felt as though the rug had been pulled from underneath them: they'd done their best to comply with WordPress.org standards but suddenly it wasn’t enough. 

An email from Matt made rounds in the community: 

> Thanks for emailing me about the theme directory. The other day I noticed a ton of bad stuff had snuck in like lots of spammy SEO links, themes whose sites said you couldn't modify them (which is a violation of the GPL), etc. Exactly the sort of stuff the theme directory was meant to avoid.

> There were also a few that violated WP community guidelines, like the domain policy. So since Monday we've been clearing stuff out en mass. If you're kosher with the GPL and don't claim or promote otherwise on your site and your theme was removed, it was probably a mistake. Give us a week to catch up with the bad stuff and then drop a note.

In a [podcast on Weblog Tools Collection](http://weblogtoolscollection.com/archives/2008/12/19/2hr-interview-with-matt-mullenweg/), Matt discusses his position on the premium theme market ([transcription](http://www.wpsnippets.com/2008/12/transcript-of-wordpress-weeklys-interview-with-matt-mullenweg-december-2008-part-1/)). In the interview, he describes how, while updating a friend’s website, he was looking for WordPress themes in the directory. He found themes with SEO links or linked to SEO sites -- behavior that the theme directory had been set up to avoid. This WordPress.org team questioned whether they wanted to allow GPL themes that only served as advertisements for non-GPL themes elsewhere.

In the interview, Matt discusses the distinction between “premium” and “free” themes, and the importance of correct labelling. When it comes to "premium" themes, Matt argues that word "proprietary" makes more sense. It doesn't make a value judgement that themes that cost money are better than those that don't. “Proprietary” is also more accurate than "commercial" or "premium" to distinguish a theme from a GPL theme, because GPL themes, such as Brian Gardner's Revolution, can be commercial.

> I love what Revolution has done, where they say 'Ok, so we still sold the theme, and we still bundle the support and everything like that with it, but it's also available as GPL.' So they're able to, within the GPL framework, create a business and respect the underlying license of the community that they are building on top of.

Most importantly, Matt makes it clear that theme developers are free to do what they want on their site, but that the WordPress project is equally free to do what it wants on WordPress.org, and that includes whether it should or should not promote businesses that sell non-GPL WordPress products. Part of the aim of the theme and plugin repositories is to promote theme and plugin developers. The project doesn’t want to promote theme and plugin developers who follow the license just to get on WordPress.org but who then violate WordPress' license elsewhere. Therefore, theme sellers who sell non-GPL products outside of WordPress.org are not promoted on the site.

The interview delineated what WordPress.org would and would not support. Even if people didn't like it they had their answer. The storm calmed and cleared the way for 2009, when businesses started to embrace the GPL.

In the months following the debate, discussions happened behind closed doors about how to sustain a business under the GPL. As the first to embrace the GPL, Brian Gardner advised other premium theme sellers. In April 2009, [Spectacu.la](https://web.archive.org/web/20090619172730/http://spectacu.la/were-going-100-gpl/), the theme shop that first posted about themes being removed from the repo, announced that it was going fully GPL. It was was followed in June by [iThemes](http://ithemes.com/2009/06/11/ithemes-is-going-gpl/) and [WooThemes](https://web.archive.org/web/20100309084201/http://www.woothemes.com/2009/06/woothemes-gpled). 

In July, Matt announced that he had contacted the Software Freedom Law Centre. They [provided an opinion on theme licensing](http://wordpress.org/news/2009/07/themes-are-gpl-too/): 

> the WordPress themes supplied contain elements that are derivative of WordPress's copyrighted code. These themes, being collections of distinct works (images, CSS files, PHP files), need not be GPL-licensed as a whole. Rather, the PHP files are subject to the requirements of the GPL while the images and CSS are not. Third-party developers of such themes may apply restrictive copyrights to these elements if they wish.

WordPress themes are not a separate entity from WordPress itself. As Mark Jaquith [wrote later](http://markjaquith.wordpress.com/2010/07/17/why-wordpress-themes-are-derivative-of-wordpress/), “As far as the code is concerned, they form one functional unit. The theme code doesn't sit "on top of" WordPress. It is within it, in multiple different places, with multiple interdependencies. This forms a web of shared data structures and code all contained within a shared memory space.”

Following that announcement, more theme sellers adopted the GPL license, though not all went 100% GPL (i.e., including CSS, images, and JavaScript). Envato, for example, whose marketplace, ThemeForest, was growing in popularity, opted [for GPL compliance -- with a split license](https://web.archive.org/web/20090819130204/http://blog.themeforest.net/site-news/important-change-to-wordpress-license-takes-effect-today-please-read) in which the PHP was GPL but the additional files were proprietary. 

Themes that are packaged using this split license follow the GPL. The PHP carries a GPL license and other assets do not. The other elements, (CSS, images, JavaScript, etc.) usually have some sort of proprietary license. This ensures legal compliance. It aims at protecting author rights by removing the freedoms guaranteed by the GPL -- the freedom to use, modify, distribute, and distribute modifications. Users are not free to do what they want with a theme licensed in such a way because the CSS and JavaScript are just as important to a theme as the PHP that interacts with WordPress’ internals. But it would be a number of years before this debate about licensing would be had.
