

## 32. Improving Communication

In addition to bringing a clearer focus on usability, Jen’s involvement in the project brought a bigger emphasis on helping people to contribute in the project. While conversations happened on wp-hackers and trac, it wasn’t always obvious how new people could get involved with the project. This was compounded by the project’s growth; it wasn’t always easy for someone new to the project to figure out what was going on, the project structure, and how to get involved. Jen [wrote a series of posts about how to get involved](http://wordpress.org/news/2009/03/contributing-to-wordpress-part-i-development/), and the development blog became a place to announce [patch marathons](http://wordpress.org/news/2009/04/the-super-awesome-wordpress-24-hour-has-patch-marathon/) and [bug hunts](http://wordpress.org/news/2009/10/upcoming-bug-hunts/).	

Jen brought more structure to the project - reinstating the weekly development chats, with agendas, and preventing the discussions from disappearing down rabbit holes. When she joined the project, the core group of developers communicated in two main ways: via the IRC chat room and using a private Skype channel. The problem with Skype is that it doesn’t create opportunities for other people to be involved. The main blog at the time was wpdevel.wordpress.com but because it was on WordPress.com and not WordPress.org it didn’t feel like it was official.  There was very little project management: the developers just wrote code and pushed it out when it was ready.	

This was at a time when Matt was stepping back. Ryan Boren took on much of the responsibility for leading development, while Jen provided project management for the software and leadership within the community. 

One of the problems that Jen tried to address was the fragmentation of communication in the project. By 2009, central communication in the project happened in a number of different places: Trac, wp-hackers, the #wordpress-dev IRC chat room, [wpdevel.wordpress.com](http://make.wordpress.org/core/page/121/) that was set up in 2008 and used for development updates, and the development blog on WordPress.org. A [post written by Jen in 2009](https://wordpress.org/news/2009/05/ideas/) highlights the state of each of WordPress’ primary communication channels: the #wordpress-dev channel had become mostly inactive, wp-hackers had thousands of subscribers but it was often just a forum for troubleshooting, the [development blog](http://wordpress.org/news/) was just used for official announcements, the [wpdevel.wordpress.com](http://make.wordpress.org/core/) blog (directed now to http://make.wordpress.org/core) was a place for the core team to post what they were working on, trac had become an an unworkable mess with hundreds of irrelevant tickets lined up for future versions, and the ideas forum featured many highly-voted but irrelevant threads.	

A [thread was opened up to discuss improvements to communication](http://wordpress.org/support/topic/ideas-forumcommunication-channels?replies=55). Suggestions included: that there be somewhere for people to raise things other than trac, to find a way for make it easier for people to write automated unit tests, that the community be able to vote on ideas, that documentation be better integrated into WordPress and trac, that P2 be used for discussion, or that BuddyPress (a social-networking plugin that is a sister-project to WordPress) be used on WordPress.org	

But in addition to suggestions, there are a number of complaints: that no one official reads the ideas forum, IRC meet ups are difficult for people to attend because of timezone differences, that there are too many channels of communication - far too much for people to keep up with.  There are also complaints about the governance of the community. Some felt that there was no transparency about how things were run. As [Jen responded](http://wordpress.org/support/topic/ideas-forumcommunication-channels/page/2?replies=55#post-1071517), “Your post just proves the point that communication is an issue. I would not say that WP lacks a clear direction, I would say that it simply hasn't been communicated properly.”	

The aim of that initial post, and of a lot of work that Jen was doing at the time, was to make it clear how decisions were made in project. It wasn’t uncommon for people to come into the IRC chat and throw in feature requests. It was more helpful if people knew the correct channels for asking questions and requesting features. It would also help if it was properly communicated what each channel was for.	

A lot of development discussion had shifted from wp-hackers to trac. The benefit of using WordPress trac for discussion is that it focuses discussion directly on a trac ticket which is opened to report a bug, feature, or enhancement. That said, as more and more people started using it, it became just as wp-hackers susceptible to intractable, bikeshed discussions.

One of these recurrent discussions has been around the issue of smilies. In 2009, [a ticket was opened up to replace](https://core.trac.wordpress.org/ticket/10145) WordPress’ smilies with Tango/Gnome smilies. The patch was [committed by Ryan Boren](https://core.trac.wordpress.org/changeset/11685)	

The first place that the smilies landed was WordPress.com, which receives daily updates to the codebase. The [feedback was negative](http://en.forums.wordpress.com/topic/new-smilies?replies=84), and reaction on the trac ticket spiralled, with contributors unhappy that the changes to the smilies had been added to core without any discussion. The problem was that WordPress [changed users’ content](https://core.trac.wordpress.org/ticket/10145#comment:18), without giving them any say in it. Some users would be unhappy if, upon updating their website, their content was changed. The discussion moved from trac tickets and spread out onto [community blogs](http://wptavern.com/nothing-to-smile-about), with calls for a public poll to make the decision. 

Ryan Boren eventually [reverted the change](https://core.trac.wordpress.org/ticket/10145#comment:28) with the comment: “Back to the prehistoric smilies that everyone complains about but evidently likes better. :-) I was a fool for not appreciating the explosive topic that is smilies, my bad.” [^Fn-1]	

As well as trying to fix problems around communication, efforts were made to improve other areas of the project. To get a patch in WordPress core, there is a review process. The WordPress Codex, on the other hand, is the opposite: a contributor can publish a piece of documentation and it will have an immediate impact. This is a great way to get documentation in a low-friction way, but its lack of rules and structure means that it has become difficult to navigate, pages are out of date, and, despite the efforts of the documentation team, it became a mess. User documentation is packaged up with developer documentation, often on the same page, and for the growing number of WordPress users and developers it became less useful. It was matched by a growth in the number of WordPress blogs that provided tutorials on how to use WordPress. In the absence of good, official documentation, people went elsewhere.

[A project was started to create](http://lists.automattic.com/pipermail/wp-docs/2009-August/002034.html) a series of handbooks for tackling different aspects of WordPress - theme development and plugin development, for example. A [trac instance was set up](http://docs.trac.wordpress.org/), along with a [wordpress.com blog for managing the handbooks](http://wphandbook.wordpress.com/). It can be difficult to recruit people to help with documentation for a long period of time. Because of its low-friction entry point, many people make their first WordPress contribution through documentation, but as they figure out the contours of the project they move on to contributing to core. The original handbook project was passed around between different people, and in 2014 they are approaching completion.

In mid-2009, the WordPress long-term security branch was dropped. Mark Jaquith had been responsible for it since it its creation in 2006. The plan was to keep it active until 2010.  However, during that period there were major changes to WordPress’ security which involved complete reworks of how various systems were handled.  It reached the point at which backporting those changes into the 2.0.x branch could have introduced new bugs or instability. The developers also found that fewer people were using the 2.0 as the introduction of new features meant that people were encouraged to upgrade to the latest version. The legacy branch continued until just six months shy of its target of 2010, and [was deprecated in July 2009](http://wordpress.org/news/2009/07/the-wordpress-2-0-x-legacy-branch-is-deprecated/).	

[Requests for a long-term support branch haven’t gone away](http://lists.automattic.com/pipermail/wp-hackers/2010-June/032447.html), however, specifically from the big companies that are using it as a CMS. It’s unlikely that WordPress will ever start a new branch. Matt [wrote to wp-hackers](http://lists.automattic.com/pipermail/wp-hackers/2010-June/032483.html):	

> Not backporting is a conscious decision. I would rather invest 100 hours in backward compatibility in a new version than 2 hours in backporting a  fix to an obsolete version of WordPress. Plus, as noted by everyone else, backporting was often impossible because it wasn't one or two line fixes, it was architecture changes that would touch dozens of files. The LTS was actually *less* stable with these "fixes" backported because it had almost no one using it.

Rather than supporting an LTS branch, the focus has been on ensuring the updates are easy and creating good reasons for people to update to the latest version. This has been an iterative process that has been constantly improved on throughout the project’s history, from Matt’s first mention of it in his 2006 State of the Word address to the introduction of automatic updates in WordPress 3.7. This approach focuses development effort on keeping users secure, rather than trying to maintain an older branch of the software.

[Fn^1] The smiley debate was reignited in 2014, when WordPress.com updated its emoticons and a proposal was made to [produce high-dpi smilies for use on retina displays](https://core.trac.wordpress.org/ticket/24970). Yet again, the arguments were brought out, and [spread once again to community blogs ](http://wptavern.com/wordpress-smiley-wars-will-core-adopt-new-emoticons). As of 2015, the smilies are still not updated.
