
## 34. Update Notifications Pt 2

Community blogs became important gathering points for those who wanted to communicate outside the official channels of the core project. One of these was WP Candy, a blog originally started by Michael Cromarty and later taken over by Ryan Imel. Another was WP Tavern, run by Jeff Chandler. As places that the community could discuss, share ideas, and vent, outside the central project channels, both WP Candy and WP Tavern played host to many major community debates. 

WP Tavern also had a forum which was a focal point for debates. One of the biggest of these was around the ongoing issue of data collection.

When WordPress 2.3 was shipped with update notifications, the initial debate quietened down. It was re-opened in 2009 on the WP Tavern forums by Lynne Pope ([Elpie](https://profiles.wordpress.org/Elpie), [who also posted to wp-hackers](http://lists.wordpress.org/pipermail/wp-hackers/2009-December/029083.html). Lynne pointed out that Matt had said that data collection would be reviewed in WordPress 2.5. She specifically raised the point of collecting URLs and asked whether WordPress had found a need to collect them, suggesting that the blog URL be replaced with an anonymous identifier. In the discussion thread on WP Tavern, Lynne went further into her concerns:

>  wordpress.org is not a legal entity so there is nobody to sue if data is misused. You can't sue a community. There is no disclosure about what data is collected or how it will be used. People are just supposed to trust that volunteers working on an open source project can be relied upon to keep personal data private?	

She also made [reference to WordPress.org being cracked in March 2007](http://wordpress.org/news/2007/03/upgrade-212/), if someone were to again crack WordPress.org they would have access to all the data.	

Since much of the data is freely available on the internet, many were unconcerned about the collection, but Lynne pointed out that what isn’t available easily is the totality of that information, i.e.  WordPress version, PHP version, locale setting, plugin information, and the website’s URL. She, and others, argued that it was unnecessary to collect URLs, which could be anonymized. In 2009, when people were growing more and more concerned about their privacy on the internet. People were signing up for social media services that collect huge amounts of data which can be used to target advertising. A 2009 paper reported that personally identifiable information could be [leaked from social networks](http://conferences.sigcomm.org/sigcomm/2009/workshops/wosn/papers/p7.pdf) and third parties could link that data with actions on other websites. At the same time, internet users are more vocal when it comes to privacy concerns and more likely to speak out. In February, for example, when Facebook changed its Terms of Service to say that user data would be retained by Facebook even if the user quit the service, the company faced an outcry and was [forced to backtrack](https://www.facebook.com/notes/facebook/update-on-terms/54746167130).

In the midst of all of these concerns about privacy, WordPress was a bastion of the independent web. If a person has privacy concerns, they can not use social media; they can install a website using something like WordPress, on their own server, with complete control over their own data. For some people in the community, the collection of data is in opposition to this independence. There is potential for abuse, and even if there is trust in the people who have access to the data now, there’s nothing to guarantee that someone else, with different motives, won’t have access to that data in the future. 
	
Mark Jaquith, who had originally opposed the data collection, [responded to Lynne on wp-hackers](http://lists.wordpress.org/pipermail/wp-hackers/2009-December/029089.html):	

> The more I thought about it, the more my knee-jerk objections faded away. Your server is doing an HTTP request, so the server knows your server's IP address. You can figure out what blog domains are hosted on that IP with a search on Bing or several other search engines. So if WordPress.org really wanted to know your URL, it could find it. Again, that's just based on the IP address, which you HAVE to send for HTTP to work. If your URL is discoverable, and your IP address has to be sent, withholding the URL doesn't actually get you more privacy, ultimately.	

Mark’s original fears, however, were mostly eased by the fact that he became more involved with the core software development and development on WordPress.org. “I’d like to be able to say that there was some like big philosophical argument that won me over,” he recalls now, “but mostly I became closer and more involved with the core team and got more access to the backend to see that okay, nothing nefarious is going on here.” 

While wp-hackers was the site for some of this discussion, the bulk of it took place on the WP Tavern blog and forums. The discussion thread generated 291 responses and was the most popular post in the lifespan of the forum. It was also [heavily discussed on WeblogToolsCollection](http://weblogtoolscollection.com/archives/2009/12/10/is-wordpress-spyware/) under a post from Jeff Chandler titled “Is WordPress spyware?”	

The issue was [reopened on WordPress trac](https://core.trac.wordpress.org/ticket/5066#comment:23), and [was mooted for the development chat](http://make.wordpress.org/core/2009/12/10/suggest-agenda-items-for-dec-17th-dev-ch/#comment-1030) - some community members felt that their concerns around privacy were valid and felt that they weren’t being taken seriously. In the thread, Matt posts that WordPress.org only stores the latest update sent but no historical data. Historical data is only held in aggregate so that statistics can be provided for plugin and theme developers.	

Mark joined in the discussion on WP Tavern to share some of the reasons he changed his mind:	

- an IP address, which must be sent by the server, is not significantly more anonymous than a URL	
- URLs allow WordPress to verify the identity of a blog. When URLs are hashed it’s no longer possibly to verify the blog identity. Without proper verification, systems that involve plugin rankings based on usage or popularity are open to manipulation and abuse.	
- the privacy policy was updated to cover api.wordpress.org	

The core developers stuck with their _decisions, not options_ philosophy and no option was added for turning off update notifications.  By the time it was raised again, in 2009, the project could apply another one of its philosophy’s to making the decision - the 80% principle: if 80% of users will find something useful then it belongs in core, if not then it belongs in a plugin. A number of plugins were created for [disabling update notifications](https://wordpress.org/plugins/search.php?q=core+update+notification); while they did get some use, it was only a fraction of the number of WordPress users. The benefits to WordPress users of having a clear sign that they should update their website or their plugin was more important than adding a preference that to satisfy a small number of people within the WordPress community.

WordPress continues to collect data about sites. The data is used in a number of ways. It affects decision making. The project can make informed decisions about what technologies to support. Using the data collected, it was possible to tell that, in 2010, around 11% of WordPress users were using a PHP version below 5.2, and that fewer than 6% of WordPress users were using MySQL 4.0. Using that information the development team could be confident about [dropping support for PHP 4.0 and MySQL 4.0](http://wordpress.org/news/2010/07/eol-for-php4-and-mysql4/). Browser usage data which helped in the decision to deprecate support for Internet Explorer 6. The data helps when there is a security issue with a plugin. The project can detect how many sites have a plugin active and get a handle on the severity of the issue. In the case of a security issue in a popular plugin, web hosts are informed so that sites with insecure versions of a plugin can be blocked at the host level. Update notifications were also an important stage in the road towards automatic updates for minor releases, which were introduced in WordPress 3.7.	