## 35. The WordPress Foundation

Throughout this time, the trademarks for WordPress continued to be held by Automattic. Trademarks are an important asset, to companies, to free software projects, to anyone who has a product which they wish to protect. The trademark represents a project’s reputation - it’s a symbol of official endorsement. Free software licenses protect the terms under which a program can be distributed, but they don’t grant trademark rights. A [2009 article by Tiki Dare and Harvey Anderson on trademarks in open source projects](http://www.ifosslr.org/ifosslr/article/view/11/37), reports that of the 65 licenses endorsed by the [Open Source Initiative (OSI)](http://opensource.org/licenses), 19 don’t mention trademarks, 19 prohibit the use of trademarks in publicity, advertising, and endorsements, and a further 26 explicitly exclude trademark rights. 

Trademark law protects the marks and branding associated with a piece of code, not the code itself. A software project’s code may be in the realm of the commons, of the community that writes that code, but the trademark is not. The growing issue of trademarks in free software projects was conceded in 2007 when the [GPLv3](http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html) came out which has a clause stating that the license may be supplemented with terms “declining to grant rights under trademark law for use of some trade names, trademarks, or service marks.” This reflects the growing acceptance in the free software community that a trademark is not necessarily linked with the software. 

A trademark is associated with the original project, and when users and consumers see that mark, they take that to mean that the product is associated with the original project too. This determines the level of quality that they expect. It also tells the person who they are dealing with - if you’re dealing with a company bearing the Widget Company logo, then you expect to be dealing with Widget Company. This matters in the free software community as much as in the corporate world. A trademark associated with a free software project carries with it certain assumptions - that the project maintainers and developers are either involved with or officially endorse that product or service, that it is of a certain level of quality, with good code quality, updates, and infrastructure. “Being the source of code arguably matters more than source code in an open-source business,” write Dare and Anderson. “The code is easily replicated, as it is open, but the trust associated with source (or origin) is not replicable. Trademarks are all about source.” The trademark represents to the user that a product or service comes from the original source: the like-minded group of developers who create the software.

Who, in the WordPress community, should hold the trademark? The first trademark holder was Automattic, who registered the trademark in 2006. But come contributors felt that they had as much right to the trademark as Automattic; people who had built the software or started their own local communities, prior to the registration of the trademark. There were many community members who felt that ownership of the codebase and the trademark lay with the community, not with a corporate entity. What Automattic did have, and the community at large didn’t, was the leverage, structure, and the money to ensure that the trademark was protected and that it wasn’t diluted. This often came at the cost of good relations with the community.

It was always Automattic’s intention that the trademark be placed into a Foundation that was a separate entity to the company. Automattic was only a short-term guardian of the trademark until there was another body in place to be its caretaker. This was made clear at the outset to the company’s investors. Phil Black, who was one of the first investors in Automattic, recalls how he knew that the trademarks would not be remaining with the company. When it was raised with Automattic’s board of investors, it was expected. “It wasn’t like Matt was proposing something to us where we felt like a significant asset was being lost,” says Phil now, “a significant asset was being transferred to the right third party as we thought that it should have been.”

The Foundation is a counterbalance to Automattic, providing checks and balances should Automattic ever be acquired. “Let’s say Evil Co ran Automattic,” says Matt, “and Evil Co only cares about making money. The balance between WordPress.org and the WordPress Foundation and WordPress.com is such that I think even Evil Co would do the right thing with regards to the community and the code and everything.” 

The Foundation took longer than expected to set up. There were various factors that needed to be in place before it happened. For one thing, before the trademarks could be transferred, they needed to be properly secured and protected. Much of this work was carried out by Toni Schneider during his early days at Automattic. It also took a long time to get the non-profit set up with the IRS. Because non-profits have tax exempt status, it can be difficult to set one up. This is to prevent tax avoidance. Matt’s intention for the Foundation, that it be simply the holder of the trademarks, is not a legitimate non-profit activity.  For a few years, applications were sent to the IRS and denied before it was actually got right. In the end, the WordPress Foundation was given 501(c)(3) status on the basis of being a an educational organization with a remit for educating people about WordPress and related free software projects. 

The [WordPress Foundation’s website](http://wordpressfoundation.org/) states its mission:

> The point of the foundation is to ensure free access, in perpetuity, to the software projects we support. People and businesses may come and go, so it is important to ensure that the source code for these projects will survive beyond the current contributor base, that we may create a stable platform for web publishing for generations to come. As part of this mission, the Foundation will be responsible for protecting the WordPress, WordCamp, and related trademarks. A 501(c)3 non-profit organization, the WordPress Foundation will also pursue a charter to educate the public about WordPress and related open source software.

The WordPress Foundation was finally set up in January 2010, and the [trademarks transferred from Automattic](http://ma.tt/2010/09/wordpress-trademark/) in September of that year. As part of the transfer Automattic was granted use of WordPress for WordPress.com, but not for any future domains, and Matt was granted a license for WordPress.org and WordPress.net. As well as transferring the trademarks for WordPress itself, the company also transferred the WordCamp name. As with WordPress itself, this would protect WordCamps as non-profit, educational events. 

The [community was pleased](http://ma.tt/2010/09/wordpress-trademark/#comments) by this step in the decoupling of WordPress the project from Automattic the company. It gave people more confidence that Automattic was not out to dominate the WordPress commercial ecosystem. Despite there still being some confusion about how people could use the WordPress trademark, eventually it settled down.

In the same year, both Matt and Automattic explored different ways to support the WordPress project. Matt had another company which he set up - Audrey Capital. Audrey is the home for Matt’s investments, but it’s also a way for him to hire some developers to take on tasks that he doesn’t have time to do and as a way to provide a balance of people who contribute to WordPress and who aren’t at Automattic.

“The idea was to kind of have five people at Automattic working on WordPress Core, five people at Audrey working on WordPress
core, and then I’ll try to get the different web hosts to each hire a person or two each, and so there’ll be between the three fifteen-ish people, full time on WordPress.org,” says Matt now. Audrey Capital’s first employee was Samuel Wood ([Otto](http://profiles.wordpress.org/otto)). 

The first employee who joined the company was Otto Wood. This came about through Matt and Otto’s shared loved of barbeque. Otto was looking for a sponsor for a BBQ team at the international barbecue festival in Memphis. Knowing Matt likes barbecue, Otto called him up to ask him to sponsor the team. Matt said yes, and came to Memphis for the festival. The following year he sponsored again. This time, after the festival, he asked Otto if he wanted to come work for him. He was later joined by Andrew Nacin (who would go on to become a lead developer of WordPress), and since then three more people have been employed by Audrey to work on the WordPress project.

At the same time, changes happened in Automattic that would have an ongoing impact in the project. By August 2010, the company had more than sixty employees. The sheer number of people meant that  the completely flat company structure was becoming unmanageable. The company moved to a team structure in which teams of people work on different projects, themes, for example, VaultPress, or support. One of the teams inside Automattic is the dot org team. This team of people are dedicated to working on the open source project. Ongoing members of the team are Ryan Boren and Andrew Ozz, WordPress lead developers, Jen Mylo, formerly UX lead of WordPress and responsible for the Crazyhorse redesign, and Andrea Middleton, who managed WordCamps. Teams are fairly fluid inside Automattic, and people come in to the dot org team to work on the WordPress project, often bringing with them the knowledge and skills that they've developed elsewhere in the company. Employees can also do a "dot org rotation", which means that they work on the WordPress project for a release cycle.

This has helped to mitigate some of the effects of hiring from the community. Seven out of the ten first Automattic employees came from the WordPress community, and over the years the company has hired a number of contributors. While this has been positive for individuals and for Automattic, it hasn't always had a positive effect. When WordPress.com was almost the sole focus, contributors worked on the core project which would then benefit Automattic. But some early contributors who became employees of Automattic found that they could spend less and less time on the project. Mark Riley, for example, who was employed to do support, found that he had no time to help out on the WordPress.org support forums. For other people, this has happened slowly, over time, as Automattic expanded out into other products, going in one direction, while the core project evolved into a different place, one with governance and structures, wildly different to the days of throwing up patches, heated discussions on wp-hackers, and waiting for Matt or Ryan to commit your code.		

The dot org team has helped to form a bridge between the company and the community, ensuring that there are people within Automattic whose attention is 100% on growing the WordPress product and project. In 2014, the number of people working on WordPress from Automattic expanded even further, when a number of developers were donated to the WordPress project and the team split in two: one with a focus on community, another with a focus on development.		

