## 37. The WordCamp Guidelines

By the time WordPress 3.0 came out, the WordPress community had grown as much offline as it had online. 107 WordCamps had taken place across the world, in countries as diverse as Thailand, Germany, the Philippines, Canada, Israel, and Chilé. These events created spaces in which WordPress users, developers, and designers get together to listen to presentations and talk about WordPress. They also create opportunities for people to meet project leaders, and for those who have only ever met each other online to meet in person, socialize, and get to know each other better. At WordCamps attract new contributors, and developers meet with users to learn about problems they have with the software.

WordCamps have always been informal events, and through the early growth of WordCamps, organization was just as informal as the events themselves. In the beginning, interested community members just decided to organize a WordCamp. They contacted Automattic for stickers, buttons, and other swag. A blog [for WordCamp organizers](http://wordcamphowto.wordpress.com/2009/06/26/hello-welcome-to-this-super-blog/) was set up in 2009, so that organizers could communicate with one another.

In May 2010, Jen took over as [central WordCamp liaison](http://wordcamphowto.wordpress.com/2010/05/19/fyi-im-taking-over-as-central-liaison/), initiating changes to WordCamp organization. Jen said that “WordCamps are meant to promote the philosophies behind WordPress itself.” Without any real structure and oversight, things happened contrary to WordPress’s core philosophies. For example, WordCamps accepted sponsorship from people and companies in violation of WordPress’s license, the GPL. While non-GPL compliant developers and companies are welcome to attend WordCamps, they’re not able to organize, sponsor, speak, or volunteer. This is because WordCamps are official platforms of the WordPress project, and the project doesn’t want to endorse or publicize products contrary to its own ethos.

There were issues with the way WordCamps were being run -- there was no central system for managing WordCamps. Organizers were left to get things done. Many WordCamps ran without budgets, despite being events that had a lot of money running through them. Some organizers had taken money for themselves; one WordCamp was set up, sponsorship money received, the WordCamp never happened, and the sponsorship wasn’t returned. Another opened for registration just so that the organizer could compile a mailing list to which they could send marketing emails. 	

WordCamps needed better oversight, including clear guidelines. From May 2010 onward, that started to happen. In some quarters, [the changes went down badly](http://onefinejay.com/2010/05/19/a-few-questions-on-jane-wells-revised-wordcamp-policies). Others [were more relaxed about the changes](http://www.bloggingpro.com/archives/2010/05/19/wordcamps-need-to-be-gpl-too-now/) but they, too, asked why people who promoted non-GPL products would be banned from speaking. While many WordPress theme shops were 100% GPL, those that hadn't followed suit were indignant that they would have comply with the GPL just to speak at a WordCamp.	

There were frustrations about the way that the guidelines emerged. They were published without consultation with WordCamp organizers and appeared to be an edict from above. Brad Williams ([williamsba1](http://profiles.wordpress.org/williamsba1)) recalls now: “I think it probably would have been more beneficial across the board for some more open conversations between the Foundation and the organizers to make sure, one, that these guidelines make sense and that we're all on the same page and if there was any concerns get those out in the open." As with other past decisionst, the guidelines weren’t part of a conversation between the Foundation and the WordCamp community. When they appeared, they seemed unilateral and the rationale was poorly communicated.

Jen published [the first version of the WordCamp guidelines](https://web.archive.org/web/20100723003529/http://central.wordcamp.org/about/). They were that WordCamps should:
	
- be about WordPress.
- be open to all, easy to access, shared with the community.
- locally organized and focused. 
- open to lots of volunteers.
- stand alone events. 
- promote WordPress’ philosophy. 
- not be about making money.	

Some guidelines were in response to problems within the community. It is important, for example, that WordCamps be about the software. At least 80% of the content should be about WordPress. Presentations about social media, SEO, and broader technology issues should not be the event's main focus. Others were more about ensuring that events about WordPress follow the same organization and ethos as the rest of the project. Like the project, WordCamps ought to be volunteer-driven, from the organizers, to the speakers, to the volunteers who help out during the day. The WordPress project was built by volunteers and it is the same with WordPress-events. WordCamps should also be accessible to anyone who chooses to attend. This means keeping the ticket price intentionally low. 

The [guidelines have been refined over the years](http://plan.wordcamp.org/become-an-organizer/representing-wordpress/), with community feedback. While not everyone remains happy about them, they have not prevented WordCamps from flourishing across the world.	
