## 38. Dealing with a Growing Project

By the time WordPress 3.0 was released there was more interest in the WordPress community and ecosystem than ever before. The WordPress community has always been diverse but by 2010 it was more diverse than ever. In the early days the project was constituted by developers who blogged, bloggers who were interested in development, and people who were interested in helping others through doing support or writing documentation. But several factors had meant that people of different backgrounds were getting more involved.

WordPress 2.7 demonstrated that making software is not just about writing code; design, user experience, ui expertise, and testing are all very much part of the process. To create user-friendly, useful software requires a diverse set of eyes. And in order to do that, the project needs to attract other contributors than just developers who enjoyed writing code and releasing it for free. This means looking for ways to engage new contributors by making clear the different pathways to contribution.

Jen Mylo had been trying to clarify the pathways that someone could take to get involved. While development, documentation, and support are obvious ways to participate, in 2009, Jen wrote a series of posts that outline the different ways that people can participate in the project. One was [graphic design](https://wordpress.org/news/2009/04/contributing-to-wordpress-part-ii-graphic-design/). After the success of a 2008 icon content, the project tried to find more ways for designers to contribute. A new component was added on trac that was focused on graphic design tasks and designers were also invited to get more involved in the evolving visual design of WordPress. Another way that people were encouraged to get involved was through [usability testing](https://wordpress.org/news/2009/05/testing-opps/). The success of WordPress 2.7 was due to the user testing that was part of the development cycle. The development team were keen to replicate this process in future releases. The final way Jen outlined was [ideas, feedback, and opinion](https://wordpress.org/news/2009/05/ideas/). 

As well as the work that Jen was doing on the development blog, she and other leaders in the project went to WordCamps to speak about getting involved with the community. Development of the community was becoming as important as development of the software.

Changes to project infrastructure also affected the project’s growth, particularly in relation to the third party developer community. Both themes and plugins had become iteratively easier for users to access. Plugins usually received updates more quickly: March 2007 saw the launch of the plugin directory, WordPress 2.3 later that year introduced the plugin update notification system, and from WordPress 2.7 onwards users could install plugins straight from their admin screens. The trajectory for themes was similar, just a little later:  the theme directory was launched in July 2008, and the launch of WordPress 2.8 in 2009 saw the theme directory arrive in a user’s admin screen. These changes made themes and plugins more available to users. Giving user more access to plugins and themes meant giving 3rd party developers more access than ever to users. Both the theme and plugin directory were growing exponentially.[ graph of growth of themes and plugins] 

The number of themes in the directory grew all of the time, and it was becoming more difficult to manage. Joseph Scott ([josephscott](https://profiles.wordpress.org/josephscott)) developed the first version of the theme directory, spent much of his time during the directory reviewing themes and providing feedback. A lot of the issues were related to security, but he also advised on best practices. There came a point, however, when the work was too much for one person. 

Joseph [posted on the news blog](https://wordpress.org/news/2010/06/expanding-the-theme-review-experiment/). He wrote: 	

> The theme directory has been chugging along for more than a year now. During that time we’ve tinkered with the review process and some of the management tools, but haven’t really opened it up as much as we’d like. It’s time to rip off the band-aid and take some action; to that end, we’re looking for community members to help with the process of reviewing themes for the directory.	

No one knew how the experiment would turn out. A [rush of people signed up for the new mailing list](http://lists.wordpress.org/pipermail/theme-reviewers/2010-June/), and a [set of guidelines was drawn up](http://codex.wordpress.org/index.php?title=Theme_Review&oldid=91889). Though the response was overall positive, some felt that they were too restrictive, that some of the theme requirements should instead be recommendations. On the WP Tavern forums, Justin Tadlock outlined some of the problems, including the fact that the guidelines didn’t allow for themes with custom template hierarchies or custom image systems. Some people felt that the theme review team should restrict itself to looking for spam and other objectionable practices. Other developers simply decided to [remove their themes from the directory](http://quirm.net/2010/08/27/retiring-themes/).	

For those reviewing the themes there were problems, particularly with manpower. The theme review queue was backed up with 100 themes in July 2010, and new themes were added every day. Only 3-4 people were actively reviewing themes. Over time, some of the processes have been automated and tools have been created to help with the theme review process. One is the [theme check plugin](https://wordpress.org/plugins/theme-check/) which tests the theme against all of the latest theme review standards.	
But despite the teething problems, the theme reviewers have managed to create a system that benefits both users and developers: users get themes that are safe and approved by WordPress.org and theme developers get feedback and help on their themes. There have been other, long term, benefits. Joseph says now:

> looking back on it over the long term it's been nice to see some folks who started way back then and have gone on to be very successful as far as developing their own themes, commercial themes, while still supporting free and open source at the same time.  I think over the long term it's been rewarding to see that jumping off point for people to be able to continue to produce more themes, and very well regarded and high quality themes.

The project diversified into concrete groups, but still communication needed to be improved. Development of the core product was discussed on wpdevel.wordpress.com, and the other teams were scattered over mailing lists and wordpress.com blogs. Towards the end of 2010, a new blog network was set up on WordPress.org - make.WordPress.org. This was the new home for the WordPress contributor teams. The first teams to have their own blogs were core, UI, theme review, and accessibility, and over time new blogs such as support, documentation, plugins, and community, have been added.

Each of the blogs on make.WordPress.org runs a P2 blog - this theme, created by Automattic for internal communication, is a microblogging tool that lets users post on the front end. The post is followed by threaded comments where people can discuss the initial post. Unless made completely open, only people who are editors of a blog can write a post while anyone is able to comment.	

This is a important centralised space on WordPress.org for contributors to gather. If a contributor is interested in core development they can follow the core blog, forum moderators can follow the support blog, people with a UI focus can follow the UI blog. Contributors can subscribe to the blogs and follow along with what’s going on from their email inboxes. While mailing lists are publicly archived, they often give the feeling of privacy because the contributor emails from their inbox and the mailing list archives are often difficult to find. By moving everything onto P2 blogs on make.WordPress.org the tone of the conversation was changed - everything took place in a very public place. This encourages a more respectful attitude amongst community members, with a focus on getting work done rather than descending into arguments.	

These sorts of focused attacks on improving discrete areas and improving communication tools have helped the project to build capacity and grow. What often happens is that a need appears, a call is put out, and if enough people answer those calls the project moves forward. Sometimes those projects, like the drive for core plugins, aren’t successful, at other times they create a new area of contributor activity that people who weren’t so involved with the project before can really participate in. This sort of community and capacity building is an important part of running a successful free software project. For a free software project that has a large user base to succeed, there needs to be enough volunteers to protect the long-term sustainability of the project. As the community grows, its needs change and new areas for contribution open up. A project that grows so far beyond its hacker roots that it encompass a diverse set of contributors is a healthy one.